Title: It's complicated: A Non-parametric Test of Preference Stability between Singles and Couples

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.04771v1

Published Time: Thu, 07 May 2026 00:50:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 55

Markdown Content:
# It’s complicated: A Non–parametric Test of Preference Stability between Singles and Couples 

## Stefan Hubner 1

> 1

Department of Economics, University of Bristol ˚

## May 2026 

Abstract This paper develops a method to use singles’ data in a non-parametric revealed preference setting of collective household choice. We use it to test the controversial assump-tion of preference stability between singles and couples, without data on intra-household allocation or marital transitions. We show that, under the preference-stability hypothesis, consumption choices from an endogenously matched population admit a conditional random-utility representation over counterfactual pairings of couples and singles. Preference stability is testable as a feasibility restriction on the observed marginal choice distributions. We reject the hypothesis using consumption data from the Dutch LISS, the Russian RLMS, and the Spanish ECPF panels. 

JEL Codes: D12, D13, J12 

Keywords: Collective model, Preference Stability, Collective Axiom of Revealed Preference, Stochastic Choice, Random Utility, Matching 

# 1 Introduction 

Measuring poverty levels, quantifying the effects of socio-economic policies on indi-viduals, and understanding the mechanisms of individual decision making are piv-otal challenges for economists and policymakers. Most of the relevant datasets, how-ever, do not feature granular enough information to meet these challenges because a majority of individuals live in collective units, such as households or families. 1 To open this black box, without observing information about resource sharing within 

> ˚

Click to download the most recent version. The author (stefan.hubner@bristol.ac.uk) would like to thank Arthur van Soest, Laurens Cherchye, Frederic Vermeulen, Stefan Hoderlein, Ian Crawford, Yuichi Kitamura, J ¨ org Stoye, John Quah, Martin Browning, Andrew Chesher, Monica Costa–Dias, Sami Stouli, and Pietro Spini for their helpful comments. 

> 1

The collective model is the workhorse model in family economics with a long tradition dating back to Becker (1965, 1981), Gorman (1976), Apps and Rees (1988), Browning et al. (1994), Browning and Chiappori (1998), Chiappori and Ekeland (2006), Chiappori and Ekeland (2009), Chiappori et al. (2012). 

1

> arXiv:2605.04771v1 [econ.EM] 6 May 2026

the household, economists make two prevalent assumptions. 2 First, an individual’s preferences do not depend on whether they are in a relationship or not. Second, preference heterogeneity is largely described by two types: men and women. In this paper, we construct a test of the former and thoroughly relax the latter. Taking the information available in typical datasets as given, we will do so without observing any transitions between relationship states, i.e. marriage or divorce, and without observing more than aggregate household-level consumption choices. The test is fully non-parametric and allows for a heterogeneous population in order to avoid testing auxiliary restrictions. Preference homogeneity is particularly restrictive in a model of collective decision making since it not only requires every individual to have the same preferences, but also assumes that any two individuals matched as a couple would arrive at the exact same sharing of resources. In the presence of unobserved heterogeneity, stability requires that the individ-ual preferences of partnered and unpartnered individuals are drawn from the same distribution. The difficulty is that this distribution, as well as its realisations, is not only unobserved to the econometrician, it is also an equilibrium quantity that arises through matching. Even if individual preferences remain unchanged upon enter-ing or leaving a relationship, systematic differences between the single and part-nered subpopulations can still arise through sorting into partnership. Thus, we derive testable implications for the observed equilibrium marginal distributions of preference-induced demands of couples, single men, and single women. Preference stability restricts how these marginal distributions can be jointly rationalised: there must be enough mass of each preference type among unpartnered individuals to match the preference composition of partnered individuals. How can we test this when we only observe marginal distributions? We intro-duce configurations : each configuration takes one couple and assigns to each spouse a counterfactual from the corresponding single population. It is preference-stable when each spouse and their counterfactual have identical ordinal preferences. We link the structural preference-stability restrictions on latent configurations to observed be-haviour by mapping each configuration into household demand: the chosen bundles of couples, single men, and single women are the empirical objects through which the restriction is tested. We show that, if the population has stable preferences, then the observed marginal demand distributions are compatible with some mixture over preference-stable configurations only.  

> 2Cf. the seminal work of: Browning et al. (2013), Lewbel and Pendakur (2008), Lewbel and Lin (2022), Lewbel and Pendakur (2022, 2026) for identification of resource shares or equivalence scales based on single-person households, Mazzocco et al. (2014), Voena (2015), Gayle and Shephard (2019), Theloudis et al. (2025), Low et al. (2018) for identification in the context of inter-temporal models, and Chiappori and Donni (2009), and Chiappori (2020) for a survey on endogenous marriage market matching models.

2To test the restriction on demand distributions whilst only observing one fixed, matched population, we introduce an auxiliary sampling device that generates hy-pothetical configurations through swapping individuals. Formally, these swaps are permutations acting on the matching allocation and the corresponding household utilities. Importantly, we show that the induced demands become conditionally i.i.d. under a mild anonymity restriction on the matching mechanism and a weak depen-dence assumption about structural preferences: exchangeability . Based on this, we develop a test statistic and show that the large sample theory of Kitamura and Stoye (2018), the established standard for random utility models, can be applied. We do not observe preferences or utilities directly, but rather the corresponding optimal demand in the form of continuous consumption bundles. Although we can recover preferences from continuous demand functions for a sufficient number of budgets, there would be an exploding number of configurations to consider, making any permutation test computationally challenging, even for small samples. Thus, we propose to classify households into discrete types. We define a single type based on the equivalence relation induced by the generalised axiom of revealed preferences (GARP; Afriat, 1967 and Varian, 1982), and, similarly, a couple type based on the collective axiom of revealed preferences (CARP; Cherchye et al., 2007, 2009, 2011). 3

Their inherent compatibility makes these axioms an effective modelling choice for our setup. In order to identify revealed preference types which we combine into discrete configuration types, we make use of (short) panel data. We apply our test to three popular datasets: the Dutch Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) , the Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS) , and the Spanish Continuous Family Expenditure Survey (Encuesta Continua de Presupuestos Fa-miliares, ECPF) used by Cherchye et al. (2012), Cherchye et al. (2011), and Adams et al. (2014), respectively, in the context of the collective model. We consistently reject the hypothesis of preference stability across these datasets and different specifications. The approach we develop in this paper can be contrasted with the literature on testing preference restrictions in a continuous setting, which is typically based on the Slutsky matrix and, thus, requires estimation of household demands and their derivatives. In their seminal work, Browning and Chiappori (1998) construct a test of collective rationality based on a parametric almost ideal demand system with addi-tive measurement errors. Similarly, Brugler (2016) estimates a parametric quadratic ideal demand system (Banks et al., 1997) in a setting without preference heterogene-ity and compares the parameter estimates for single men, single women and couples to draw conclusions about preference stability. While almost ideal demand systems 

> 3This is not restrictive, because any two household types are observationally equivalent if they are not distinguishable in terms of their preferences without an additional functional form restriction.

3provide a flexible parametric form allowing for easy testing of parameters, both the potential for misspecification and the restrictions imposed on preferences to ensure additive separability of the errors, are problematic. To allow for non-separability, and thus a larger class of preferences, Hubner (2023) develops a collective random utility model and derives conditions for non-parametric identification of random utility and Pareto weights by showing global invertibility of demands, under the assumption of observed private consumption. Further, under the preference stability assumption, Lewbel and Lin (2022) show identification of a semi-parametric model with hetero-geneous structural preferences and a general functional form assumption. Botosaru et al. (2023), Hsieh et al. (2024) incorporate explicit preference and sharing hetero-geneity into collective demand systems, and Chiappori et al. (2025) estimate dynamic collective models allowing for unobserved preference heterogeneity and evolution across life-cycle stages. While part of the literature has departed from the prefer-ence stability assumption in favour of functional form restrictions, such as Dunbar et al. (2013, 2021), Lechene et al. (2022), Calvi (2020) who use preference similarity, or Sokullu and Valente (2022) who use a panel, combining singles data with couples data provides a strong form of identification, particularly in a non-parametric setting. The use of singles data in the context of the revealed preference characterisation of the collective model (Cherchye et al., 2007, 2009) is novel. The advantage of a revealed preference based approach over the continuous approaches outlined above is the option of modelling unobserved preference heterogeneity without requiring global invertibility of demands. This bypasses the need for ad-hoc functional form assumptions in favour of testable choice-based restrictions. Stochastic revealed pref-erence settings have been studied in the context of the unitary consumption model. Hoderlein and Stoye (2014) consider the weak axiom of revealed preference in the uni-tary model. Observing the same population in different price regimes, as repeated cross-sections, they use copula bounds (Frechet-Hoeffding) on the probability that the population violates the weak axiom of revealed preferences. Kitamura and Stoye (2018); Deb et al. (2017) integrate this approach into the stochastic choice framework of McFadden and Richter (1991) and McFadden (2005) by partitioning budget sets into patches using the strong axiom of revealed preference. While, conceptually, our approach is very different, the final test statistic is closely related to theirs. We show that the large sample theory of Kitamura and Stoye (2018) applies to our theory which extends random utility to also incorporate ran-dom matching through exchangeable configurations. There is a range of recent con-tributions targeting the computational complexity of this class of problems, most prominently Smeulders et al. (2021), Aguiar and Kashaev (2021), Koida and Shirai (2024), Turansick (2025). We contribute to this literature by introducing a fast, paral-4lel non-negative least squares algorithm which leverages the sparsity of the problem. 4

We proceed as follows. Section 2 introduces a theoretical device that allows us to define utilities under counterfactual assignments which we use to define configu-rations. Section 3 defines heterogeneous preferences as random variables, and their dependence in the population. It proceeds by defining latent configurations and develops the necessary theory relating them to observed continuous choices. Falsi-fiability of preference stability is discussed through the lens of the Slutsky matrix. Section 4 then operationalises the theory by introducing the discrete characterisation of choices and configurations, based on revealed preference restrictions on observed demands. It develops a test statistic based on a reformulation of the restrictions as a semi-definite, quadratic programme. Section 5 provides empirical results and dis-cusses robustness and extensions, including endogeneity of total expenditures, public goods, an alternative characterisation of collective households, and a heterogeneity analysis. All proofs can be found in Appendix A.1. 

# 2 Factual and Counterfactual Assignment 

The aim of this section is to put singles and couples into one common framework. This is needed because singles are observed on their own, while couples are observed only through joint household choices. Once both are described in the same way, we can compare an observed couple with the counterfactual couple formed by replacing both partners with singles. 

## A F our -I ndividual Population 

We begin with the smallest economy that contains the comparison at the heart of the paper. It has only four individuals which we name: Apollo, Athena, Zeus, and Hera. Let Apollo be the single man and Athena be the single woman. Both are unitary households. Let Zeus assume the role of the married man and Hera the role of the 

married woman. They also form a household together. Ruling out the trivial case, in which they all share the same preferences, resulting in all three households being unitary, there are two remaining scenarios. First, every-one has their own distinct preferences. In this case we can think of Zeus & Hera as a collective household. Second, Apollo and Zeus as well as Athena and Hera share the same set of preferences, respectively, but the two sets could differ. This distinction is what we study in this paper. 

> 4Haskell code is available as a GitHub repository and a simulation study to evaluate speed, finite sample size, and power of the test statistic can be found in Appendix A.3.

5In a setting where each individual derives utility from consumption, the difficulty arises from what is observed in standard datasets. For Apollo and Athena, we ob-serve their respective household consumption, which, under standard conditions and sufficient price variation, allows us to directly recover their utilities up to an ordinal transformation (Hurwicz and Uzawa, 1971). By contrast, we only observe Hera and Zeus as a couple, so we only know that their household’s consumption maximised their collective utility. However, both Hera’s and Zeus’ individual utilities remain unidentified (Chiappori and Ekeland, 2006, 2009). Hence, in order to test preference stability, we cannot directly compare Zeus with Apollo or Hera with Athena. Instead, we proceed indirectly. We start from the observed couple, Zeus and Hera, and use their choices across price regimes to verify that their behaviour is consistent with collective rationality. Preference stability demands that moving from singlehood to partnership can only rescale the cardinality of utilities. We therefore ask whether Zeus and Hera’s observed choices would remain collectively rational if their preferences were replaced by the ones revealed by Apollo and Athena, respectively. If this breaks collective rationality, the four-tuple described by the two exchanges (Zeus, Hera, Apollo, Athena), which we call a configuration , is not preference-stable, since at least one spouse’s ordinal preferences must differ. 

## A C ountable Population 

As we move to the general case, the economy consists of heterogeneous men and women, and each couple is a one-to-one match between any two individuals from opposite sides of the matching market. We represent the population by an assign-ment graph which we later permute to construct configurations. To achieve this, the assignment graph must not only connect partnered individuals but also singles. We therefore define an extended population with an assignment matrix in which each single is paired with a distinct dummy partner. 5 This representation lets us describe preferences and choices for both observed and counterfactual assignments. Corollary 1 later shows that any unitary utility admits such a representation. Let the population of individuals on each side of the market be indexed by N

and partitioned into three countable subsequences denoted N2, N1, N0. They rep-resent individuals currently living in a couple, single individuals, and dummies, respectively. 6 Without loss of generality we arrange the data, leading with couples 

N2, followed by singles N1, and dummies N0. We represent matches as the matrix           

> 5This is related in spirit to the dummy types used in matching models to absorb unmatched mass. Here, because the problem is formulated as an assignment at the individual level, each single requires a separate dummy counterpart.
> 6Formally: Nk=tnPN:nmod 3 =ku, rearranged to form blocks as in Figure 1 (r.h.s.).

6M = tmij ui,jPN with entry mij = 1 if man i is matched with woman j, and 0 otherwise. Visualised in Figure 1 (l.h.s.), couples (purple) form the leading block N2 ˆ N2. Each single is matched with exactly one dummy individual from the other side: N1 ˆ N0

for the single men (blue), and N0 ˆ N1 for single women (red). Figure 1: Block structure of N ˆ N extended assignment matrix (l.h.s.) with finite sample counterparts (r.h.s.). Factual couples Zeus & Hera Counterfactual couples ( τ f )Zeus & Athena Counterfactual single men ( τm)Zeus Counterfactual couples ( τm)Apollo & Hera Counterfactual couples ( τm, τ f )Apollo & Athena Factual single men Apollo Counterfactual s. women ( τ f )Hera Factual single women Athena dummy couples 

N2

N1

N0

N2 N1 N0

# f N2 N1 N0

# m 2 5 1 4 0 3 6

N2

2 AA1 1

5 1

N1

1 1 AA1

4 1

7 1

N0

0 1 AA1

3 1

Note: The figure depicts the block structure of the population representation. Men are represented by rows, women by columns. On the left hand side, each solid box represents a factual population block, dotted blocks are counterfactuals. The right hand side shows a population with two couples, three single men, and two single women before and after the transpositions τ f = τm = ( 1 2 ). The removed links are red and the new ones blue. Their respective unions with the unaffected black links make up the factual and counterfactual assignment, respectively (both are permutations). The dotted box shows the assignment matrix without dummies (not a permutation). Example 2 in Appendix A.2.2 describes the four individual scenario from above within this framework. 

Due to the artificial matches between singles and dummies, each individual is matched exactly once . As a consequence, every observed assignment can be repre-sented as a permutation σ, a one-to-one map from N to itself, and we can write assignments as mij = δj,σ(i).7 This allows us to write any counterfactual assignment as a function composition with any permutation of the original assignment (see e.g., Rotman, 1994, Chapter 3). Here, the only counterfactual assignments with empirical content are exchanges of partnered individuals from N2 with singles from N1.

Definition 1 (Transposition) . Let S 8 be the set of permutations over N. A transposition 

(i i 1) P S8 is the permutation that swaps i and i 1 and fixes all other indices. Let T be the set of any pairs of transpositions defining the exchanges between partnered individuals i P N2

and singles i 1 P N1.

> 7

The function δij is the Kronecker delta which takes the value one if i = j and zero otherwise. 

7This formalises the partner replacement from the thought experiment above as a 

joint action on the extended assignment matrix: (τm, τ f ) ¨ M ” t mτm(i),τ f (j)ui,jPN for transpositions (τm, τ f ) P T .8 This is a simultaneous row-column exchange which leads to the new permutation τ f ˝ σ ˝ τm.9 This can be read (right to left) as: for any man, 

τm finds which position he occupies after the swap, σ then looks up who that position was originally matched to, a woman, to whom we apply τ f .This row-column exchange is a relabelling of the edges in the matching graph. It serves two roles. First, it allows us to represent any counterfactual assignment structure. Each element represents a configuration. Second, it allows us to define preferences for both factual and counterfactual couples. We require the following assumption about matching. 

Assumption 1 (Anonymity) . Let M be the outcome of a matching allocation mechanism based on some couple-specific variables Z = tzij ui,jPN, possibly unobserved to the econometri-cian. For any permutations ςm, ς f P S8 we have M (( ςm, ς f ) ¨ Z) = ( ςm, ς f ) ¨ M(Z).

This is a permutation-equivariance assumption and restricts matching so that it is not based on identities. It states that if Zeus and Apollo exchanged characteris-tics, then Hera would have matched with Apollo instead of Zeus. In other words, individuals only care about the characteristics of their partner, not their identity. A violation would undo any forthcoming assumption that restricts dependence between individual’s preferences. We show in Appendix A.2.1 that the solution to the finite assignment problem M(z) = arg max σPSn

ř 

> i,jPN

δjσ(i)Φ(zij ) (Galichon, 2021) where matching is based on joint surplus Φ(z), as in Becker (1973), satisfies this property. 

# 3 Preference Stability in the Population 

In the previous section we introduced a language to define factual and counterfactual households purely from a matching perspective. In this section, we introduce pref-erences for both factual and counterfactual households and formulate the economic content of the preference stability hypothesis. We argue that, even if all individuals draw preferences from the same environment, equilibrium matching can sort them into single and partnered subpopulations which we call pools . Preference stability is therefore not a statement about equality household by household, but about the composition of preferences in these pools. We show how this restriction on latent distributions can be translated into one based on observable demand distributions, through a random utility and matching representation.                                            

> 8An action in our setting is a map over the indices of a matrix ς¨ij satisfying (i) identity: id ¨ij =ij
> and (ii) compatibility: σ¨(ς¨ij ) = ( σ˝ς)¨ij for id, σ,ςPS8, see Rotman (1994, Chapter 9).
> 9This is, because m1
> ij =mτm(i),τf(j)=δτf(j),σ(τm(i)) =δj,(τf)´1(σ(τm(i))) =mi,(τf˝σ˝τm)( i).

8Model 

We now define our random utility primitives, based on an environment of unob-served preferences. We describe the class of utility models we consider and give a representation of household utility for both singles and couples. 

Assumption 2 (Unobserved Heterogeneity) . Let the environment of unobserved ordinal preferences be represented by a random element ω ” (ωm, ω f ) P Ω ” XN ˆ XN where X is a Polish space. Let a couple (i, j)’s preferences be the element ωij = ( ωmi , ω fj ). For dummy individuals i , j P N0, we normalise preferences to ωmi = ω fj = ω0.

To accommodate any utility representation, we choose X to be Polish, a space general enough for this task, while structured enough so that all relevant results for random variables carry over to this space, if endowed with the standard Borel sigma algebra B.10 We let μ be the corresponding probability measure. The sample space Ω allows for dependence across individuals. We require this, because we only observe a sample from a fixed, endogenously matched population. Thus, we cannot rely on independent sampling of ωij from some common distribu-tion. What matters for our purposes is a weaker form of independence. In particular, a symmetry assumption that requires that before matching, names carry no intrinsic economic information. Assumption 3 formalises this. 11 

Assumption 3 (Exchangeability of the Preference Environment) . Finite relabellings of real, non-dummy individuals ςm, ς f P G0 ” t ς P S8 : ς(N0) = N0u preserve the joint distribution of household preferences. Formally, (ωm, ω f ) d

= ( ςm ¨ ωm, ς f ¨ ω f ).12 

In Assumption 2 we impose a normalisation to remove economically irrelevant heterogeneity due to the arbitrary assignment of single individuals to dummy in-dices. Consequently, we only look at permutations G0 that leave those unaffected. Assumption 3 tells us that being called Hera or Athena, respectively Zeus or Apollo, has no bearing on the realisation of preferences. Thus, ex-ante, prior to matching, this immediately permits a de Finetti (1931) interpretation of non-dummy individual pref-erences in which we may think of nature drawing a “population-level” distribution                            

> 10 Indeed, a Polish space is a separable ,complete ,metricable space that induces the standard Borel sigma algebra, allowing standard conditioning statements (Kallenberg, 1997, Thm 5.3), weak conver-gence of measures defined on it (Kallenberg, 1997, Thm 14.3 & Thm 14.5), and de Finetti (1931) type representation theorems which we require below (Hewitt and Savage, 1955). The product space X3is, by definition, also a Polish space (Kallenberg, 1997, Lemma 1.2)
> 11 Indeed, since our test is based on choice frequencies, which we get from pushing the random pref-erences defined in Assumption 2, through the household’s optimal choice rule, we need not consider all possible events in B(Ω), it is sufficient to only consider I0based on symmetric subsets of Ω.
> 12 The symbol d
> =refers to equality in distribution :Xd
> =Yiff P(XPA) = P(YPA)for all A.

9for the individual unobserved preferences ¯ μ0 ” ( ¯μm 

> 0

, ¯ μ f 

> 0

).13 Consider the three distinct populations from the empirical section: Netherlands, Spain, and Russia. What this says is that, for each of them, nature first draws the population-level composition of preferences, which we may think of as the institutional and cultural environment that leads to the formation of preferences. Then, conditional on these compositions, each individual draws i.i.d. preferences ωmi and ω fj from ¯ μm 

> 0

and ¯ μ f 

> 0

, respectively. Uncon-ditionally, preferences need not be independent, since all agents belong to the same realised market, making it a weaker requirement than unconditional independence. 14 

With this, we can now relate the unobserved heterogeneity, defined as random variables in Assumptions 2-3, to structural, behaviour-relevant primitives. 

Assumption 4 (Random Collective Utility) . The following holds for all i , j P N:(i) Individual utilities u mi ” u(ωmi , ¨) and u fj ” u(ω fj , ¨) are twice continuously-differentiable, strictly quasi-concave utility functions defined on X Ď RL

> +

, i.e. bundles of L continu-ous consumption goods. 15 

(ii) The aggregation rule (umi , u fj ) Þ Ñ Φij leads to Pareto-efficient outcomes. (iii) Individual utilities only depend on own-good consumption and are time-homogeneous. 

Assumption 4.(i) lists the standard properties of a deterministic individual-specific utility function which guarantee a unique solution. Part (ii) defines the collective model of Chiappori (1988, 1992). Efficient bargaining rules out non-cooperative, strategic behaviour of individuals towards their spouse. Part (iii) states that indi-viduals are egoistic and only derive utility from their own consumption and not through externalities of their partner’s consumption. 16 Without this assumption, we cannot differentiate between preference-driven consumption changes and the possi-bility of joint consumption of public goods (non-rival, non-excludable) as a couple. For example, consider individuals with stable preferences commuting to work by car. As a single they have to pay market prices for gasoline, but as a couple they can share the cost and consequently consume more other goods, which could lead us to believe that preferences have changed. 17 We further assume preferences to be time-homogeneous. Without this condition, any variation of choices between periods  

> 13 Measure ¯ μ0, obtained by conditioning on

I0 ” σ(Im  

> 0,

I f 

> 0

), can distinguish only symmetric events.          

> 14 One example where this may fail is, if the name entails information which is not otherwise ac-counted for, e.g. belonging to a certain local matching market. To mitigate this, in the empirical section, we also consider hierarchical specifications using observed demographics.
> 15 For the exposition with continuous choice, we make the innocuous injectivity assumption that any two ωm
> 1‰ωm
> 2induce different first order conditions (and similar for f).
> 16 This nests the Beckerian caring model with altruistic preferences (Becker, 1981). A sufficient con-dition for this is weak separability of the form ui

(xm, x f ) = Gi(gi(xm), x f ) for any two differentiable, increasing, real-valued functions G and g.

> 17 We relax this assumption in the empirical section by allowing for a parametric household produc-tion function that allows for consumption externalities.

10 could be attributed to a change in preference over time rather than individuals facing a variation of prices in different periods. 18 Together, they allow us to use survey data and not rely on an experimental setting in the empirical part of the paper. 19 

We now give economic content to the factual and counterfactual household frame-work by showing how latent preference primitives generate common utility represen-tations for singles and couples. 

Lemma 1 (Representation of Collective Utilities) . Under Assumption 4, for any individ-uals i , j P N2, there exists a Pareto weight λij ” λ(ωmi , ω fj , ¨) that permits the following representation of household utility: 

Φ(ωmi , ω fj , ¨) = λ(ωmi , ω fj , ¨)um(ωmi , ¨) + ( 1 ´ λ(ωmi , ω fj , ¨)) u f (ω fj , ¨). (1) For any efficient aggregation of preferences to a collective unit, there exists a rep-resentation for the household utility that can be decomposed into a weighted combi-nation of individual utilities with weights proportional to each member’s bargaining power (Chiappori and Ekeland, 2009). Note that Pareto weights depend on both individuals’ preference types (ωmi , ω fj ).20 

In Corollary 1 of Appendix A.1 we show that the household utility Φij ” Φ(ωmi , ω fj , ¨)

of a single-dummy match is an ordinally equivalent representation of the single’s uni-tary utility ui. Thus, we may represent any household’s utilities as an element of the array tΦij ui,jPN, with the dummy partner’s demand set to zero for singles. 

## Preference Stability 

In the previous subsection we have concluded that any factual or counterfactual household has a well-defined utility representation within the common framework. We now tie this to the matching structure in equilibrium, which, under the alterna-tive, induces population level differences due to sorting. Consequently, this leads to different compositions of preferences between the subpopulations (pools) of single and partnered individuals. While this paper is agnostic about the matching mechanism, we may think of peo-ple as matching to maximise joint surplus Φ. The observed matching allocation is the result of individuals optimising their consumption utility by choosing partners. 21,22  

> 18 Applied to long panel data, this assumption ceases to be innocuous. This can be mitigated by con-ditioning on time-dependent demographics which capture changes in how preferences are aggregated (distribution factors). The author would like to thank an anonymous referee for pointing this out.
> 19 See Blow et al. (2021); Adams et al. (2014) for a discussion of time consistency.
> 20 In this exposition, we abstract from distribution factors that could shift bargaining power.
> 21 The allocation is efficient, in the absence of blocking pairs Shapley and Shubik (1971).
> 22 One may shift ordinal utility representations by h

(zi, zj) for observed G-exchangeable demograph-ics (zi, zj), and an equivariant aggregator 0h to also account for matching based on observed charac-teristics, such as education and age, which we consider in Section 5. 

11 Lemma 2 (Within Pool Exchangeability) . For the realised partition of partnered individuals 

N2 and singles N1 let permutations associated with within-pool relabellings be G ” t ς P G0 : ς(N2) = N2, ς(N1) = N1u .

Then, under Assumptions 1-4, within every realised matching-induced pool: (i) the preference environment ω remains exchangeable in the sense of Assumption 3, but only with respect to G, and (ii) the realised matching rule σω ” M(Φ(ω)) is permutation equivariant. 

The matching equilibrium partitions the population into single and partnered in-dividuals. Lemma 2.(i) shows that ex-ante exchangeability is therefore no longer preserved across the whole population, but only within the realised pools of singles and couples. Ex post, membership in the partnered pool N2 or the single pool N1

is informative, since the matching equilibrium may select different types into the two pools. Being called Hera rather than Athena, or Zeus rather than Apollo, now matters: the names no longer only label individuals, but also identify whether their preferences are drawn from the realised partnered or single subpopulation. In conjunction with part (ii), which establishes anonymity of the realised matching 

σω, we conclude that individuals belonging to factual households remain exchange-able within each block of Figure 1: the couples, single men, and single women. 23 This allows us to represent the different preference distributions as conditionally i.i.d. and we may define the main population-level hypothesis as follows: 

Hypothesis H 0 (Population Preference Stability). For each market side κ P t m, f u and pool ℓ P t 1, 2 u, denote the realised within-pool distribution for A P B(X) and i P Nℓ as: 

¯μκ 

> ℓ

(A) ” μ(ωκ 

> i

P A | Iκ 

> ℓ

)( ω),

The population is preference stable if and only if the distributions for singles and partnered individuals coincide: 

¯μm 

> 1

= ¯μm 

> 2

and ¯μ f 

> 1

= ¯μ f 

> 2

.Starting from the ex-ante composition of preferences ¯ μm 

> 0

and ¯ μ f 

> 0

, matching sorts individuals into singles and partnered individuals, and within-pool distributions ¯ μκ

> ℓ

are realised. 24 The null hypothesis restricts this post-matching composition. It rules out selection into the single and partnered pools based on preferences ωκ 

> i

because both pools must contain the same realised distribution of individual preference types. This does not require matching to ignore preferences. Indeed, conditional on being                               

> 23 Due to anonymity, once a population ωis realised, we write σwithout explicit dependence on ω.
> 24 The sigma-algebra Iκ
> ℓcollects events that are invariant under within-pool relabellings, as defined in Lemma 2. The object ¯ μκ
> ℓis a regular conditional distribution, that is, a kernel ¯ μκ
> ℓ:ΩˆB(X)Ñ
> [0, 1 ]. Equivalently, for each APB(X), ¯ μκ
> ℓ(¨,A)is Iκ
> ℓ-measurable, while for each ωPΩ, ¯ μκ
> ℓ(ω,¨)is a probability measure on X(Kallenberg, 1997, Theorem 5.3).

12 partnered, preferences may still determine who is matched with whom, for example through positive assortative matching. 25 

The distributions defining population preference stability are unobserved. We now develop the relevant individual-level foundations to translate this to an empiri-cally falsifiable restriction. For this, we define a latent configuration which bundles an observed couple with a single man and a single woman whose preferences serve as counterfactual replacements. 

Definition 2. We call the quadruple (i, j, i1, j1) ” (i, σ(i), τm(i), τ f (σ(i))) , where i P N2, a latent household configuration which takes any factual household (i, j) and pairs it with the individual utilities of two singles, using the transpositions τm and τ f . We call a configuration preference-stable if and only if ωmi = ωmi1 and ω fj = ω fj1 .

With this, we can define the structural restriction implied by preference stability that gives our test empirical content. Let Sij (p) be the Slutsky matrix associated with utility Φij under normalised budgets wij = 1. The Slutsky matrix tells us how demand reacts to prices, keeping utility constant. For singles, this is purely a substitution effect and must, thus, be symmetric. For couples, by Browning and Chiappori (1998), there is an additional exactly one-dimensional channel: a price change may alter the scalar resource sharing and thereby redistribute resources within the household. That is, Sij (p) ´ ¯Sij (p) = uij (p)vij (p)J is rank one for some symmetric matrix ¯ Sij (p).26 This restriction is testable with only aggregate demand data. Preference stability sharpens it within a given configuration. 

Lemma 3 (Preference-Stable Configuration) . Under Assumptions 1-4, for any preference-stable configuration (i, j, i1, j1), preference stability requires that the symmetric part satisfies: 

¯Sij (p) P

" 1

η Smi10

 p

η



+ 11 ´ η S f

> 0j1

 p

1 ´ η



: η P (0, 1 )

*

,

where S mi10 and S f 

> 0j1

are the within-configuration Slutsky matrices for singles. 

This says that for each factual couple there exists a relative share of the household resources received by the man, denoted by ηij (p) P (0, 1 ), such that the symmetric component ¯ Sij (p) can be replaced by the within-configuration singles i1 and j1 evalu-ated at ηij (p) and 1 ´ ηij (p). Preference stability then has a sharp implication: once the symmetric part has been fixed to the single Slutsky matrices, the couple may differ from their sum only through this one-dimensional redistribution channel.       

> 25 Suppose there are two types of preferences: type A and type B. A preference-stable population might consist of 50% of type A and 50% of type B in both the singles’ and couples’ pool. Within the couples’ pool, all type A, respectively, type B men and women might be matched assortatively.
> 26 We may think of this as a factor structure: the factor vij (p)measures how a price change affects sharing of resources. The loading uij (p)is the direction of the demand changes as one Pound from j
> is reallocated to i, holding prices fixed.

13 Random Utility and Matching Characterisation 

Having shown how preference stability restricts behaviour within a single latent con-figuration, we now show how these local restrictions help restrict the joint distribution to be compatible with preference stability at the observable population level. Because we observe only one realised matched population, the relevant source of random-ness cannot come from repeated markets. Rather, we obtain it from a label-invariant randomisation over counterfactual assignments within that population. This yields a distribution over latent configurations and, through utility-maximisation, a random utility and matching representation of observed behaviour. We start by describing the observable features of a typical dataset: a finite sam-ple of household demands across budgets, common prices, household income, and possibly individual demographics: 

Assumption 5 (Observed Behaviour) . Let x ijt be the maximiser of Φij under budget B ijt =

B(pt, wijt ), where B(p, w) = tx P X : pJx ď wu.27 For household i = 1 . . . nc + nm + n f ,possibly a dummy, we observe (j, zi, txit , wit , ptut=1... T ) where z i ” (zmit , z fjt ) are observed characteristics, and aggregate demand is x ijt = xmijt + x fijt .

From this data we can identify factual household-level demand functions xij ”

x(ωmi , ω fj , ¨). Representing configurations via pairs of transpositions (τm, τ f ):

χ(ω, τm, τ f )i ”



(ωmi , ω f

> σ(i)

), (ωm

> τm(i)

, ω0), (ω0, ω f  

> (τf˝σ)( i)

)



, (2) we obtain the observable demand functions by sending them through the map: 

Ψ ” (Ψc, Ψm, Ψ f ) where Ψκ ” argmax ˝ Φ ˝ proj κ. (3) The projection proj κ takes a configuration χi and extracts the respective couple’s, single male’s, and single female’s preferences, Φ builds household utility, which is then maximised to obtain demands. Since, within a configuration, the single’s demand functions serve as counterfactu-als to the partnered individual’s demand functions, we can check preference stability for a given configuration according to Lemma 3. We collect all configurations that are consistent with preference stability into the set W0.To generate counterfactual assignments we randomise over transpositions. For this, we introduce the sampling device ρ, a probability distribution defined on the space T . We denote as μ b ρ the joint distribution of preferences and transpositions on Ω ˆ T . This leads to a distribution ν of configurations induced by the preference environment and randomisation over transpositions.   

> 27 As is common in the empirical literature of consumer demand we will work with normalised prices pt/wijt leading to unit budgets. See e.g. Cornes (1992) and also Kitamura and Stoye (2018) for a discussion. In the empirical section we discuss endogeneity of total expenditure.

14 Definition 3. Each random environment (ω, τ) P Ω ˆ T defines the collection of demands 

(xc, xm, x f ) ” Ψ(χ(ω, τ)) as functions from prices P to bundles X . The distribution π,measuring events A in the space of demand functions, is the push-forward of ν under Ψ:

π(A) = 

ż

1tΨ(χ) P Auν(dχ) = 

ż

1tΨ(χ(ω, τ)) P Au (μ b ρ)( dω, dτ).

We observe only the marginal distributions of π which we denote πc, πm, and π f .

Through this formulation, we can define the respective marginal distributions of factual demands for couples, single men, and single women, as a mixture of config-urations. Each of the configurations we can check for preference stability. We show that this is a random utility model, by proving that configurations, and thus the in-duced demand functions, are sampled randomly. In addition, we require that the population level preference-stability hypothesis H0 implies the existence of a distri-bution of configurations supported only on the preference-stable set W0. This leads us to the main result of the paper. 

Theorem 1 (Random Utility and Matching Representation) . Let I‹ collect all events on 

Ω ˆ T that depend on the configuration sequence only up to relabelling of individuals within pools G. Under Assumptions 1-5, the sequence of configurations (χi)iPN2 is conditionally i.i.d. given I‹ with distribution ¯ν. The conditional distribution of demand triples induced by sampling of configurations according to Definition 3 is the push-forward of ¯ν under Ψ:

¯π(A) = 

ż

1tΨ(χi) P Au ¯ν(dχi). (R.1) 

Further, under Hypothesis H 0, the marginal demand distributions ¯πc, ¯ πm, ¯ π f of ¯π admit a preference-stable representation. That is, there exists ν‹ supported on preference-stable config-urations W 0, such that pushing it forward through Ψc, Ψm, Ψ f yields the respective marginals. 

In the preliminary Lemma 4 in Appendix A.1.5 we show that, if we sample config-urations without introducing dependence on the unobserved preferences ω, e.g. by systematically over-sampling certain individuals or types, the within-pool exchange-ability of preferences established in Lemma 2 extends to the sequence of latent con-figurations. 28,29 Consequently, this extends the de Finetti (1931) representation of the preference environment to the configuration sequence tχiuiPN2 (Hewitt and Savage, 1955). Thus, every event we can learn from this economy which is not a consequence of arbitrary labels is contained in the sub-sigma-algebra I‹, and can be measured by a conditional distribution. 30                

> 28 In our implementation, we exhaustively enumerate configurations which satisfy this symmetry requirement, as would uniform sampling at random.
> 29 In Figure 1, this extends the within-solid-block exchangeability to the dashed counterfactual blocks
> generated by (τm,τf), since each of them is a measurable projection of the exchangeable sequence χ.
> 30 The distribution is random through its dependence on the state of the world (ω,τ)„μbρ. Upon realisation of the whole environment of latent preferences and configurations, the distribution becomes deterministic. Any counterfactual (ω1,τ1)leads to a different distribution, on the same sigma-algebra.

15 Theorem 1 tells us that, conditional on I‹, each component of the configuration array has distribution ¯ ν. Pushing this conditional distribution through Ψ gives the conditional choice distribution ¯ π. Thus, we can treat demand functions as condition-ally i.i.d. which permits the construction of non-parametric estimators for them. To rationalise the observed distributions ¯ π there must exist a distribution ν‹ that puts all mass on the subset of preference-stable configurations. Theorem 1 further establishes that failure of rationalisability implies failure of the preference stability hypothesis H0, making the hypothesis empirically falsifiable. 31 

Having developed the random utility theory based on continuous demand func-tions, in the next section we operationalise it by deriving the discrete choice counter-part using revealed preference axioms. 

# 4 Testing based on a Discrete Choice Characterisation 

The configuration-level Slutsky restriction from the continuous characterisation in the previous section requires non-parametric estimation of demands and, thus, a large number of observed budget sets. This section replaces the continuous char-acterisation by one that characterises choices on a small number of budgets. We introduce distinct revealed preference types, replacing demand functions, which we combine to configuration types. Preference stability then becomes a support restric-tion on a finite-dimensional distribution over configuration types, which can be oper-ationalised as a constrained optimisation problem based on observed choice frequen-cies and a deterministic matrix defining preference-stable configurations. 

## Choice and Configuration Types 

It is neither feasible nor necessary to consider the high-dimensional problem with continuous demands and permutations at the individual level. 32 Instead, we now show that we can, equivalently, use a characterisation based on revealed preference types, defined in a way that knowledge of them fully determines rationality and efficiency. Counterfactual assignments can then also be considered at the type level, reducing the dimensionality of the problem drastically. 

Definition 4 (GARP) . A collection of choices (pt, xt)Tt=1 satisfies the generalised axiom of revealed preferences (GARP) if there exist binary relations R and R that satisfy:          

> 31 Corollary 2 in the Appendix A.1.7 goes beyond this and characterises preference stability, and, thus, the existence of ν‹, via Block-Marschak inequalities.
> 32 For double transpositions (τm,τf)PT, the cardinality of the space of permutations is of order
> O(n4), if the number of single individuals is proportional to n.

16 (i) if p J 

> s

xs ě pJ 

> s

xt, then x s R x t,(ii) if x s R x u, x u R x v, . . . , x z R x t for some sequence (u . . . z), then x s R xt,(iii) if x s R xt, then p J 

> t

xt ď pJ 

> t

xs.

If an individual purchases bundle xs even though xt was affordable at the same prices, we say it was “directly revealed preferred” and write xs Rx t. Further, by chain-ing together any (possibly empty) sequence of direct revelations of preferences, tran-sitivity allows us to infer preference revelations of some bundles we cannot otherwise compare because we never observe budgets that allow us to directly distinguish them. GARP demands that there is no xs which is revealed preferred to xt and yet, at the same time, xt is revealed preferred to xs. No cycles of mutual preference can occur. 

x1 

> t

x1

> s

xs

x1

> t

x1

> s

xt

Figure 2: Illustration of individual choices under two different budgets. 

Example. Figure 2 depicts two intersecting budget lines and two arbitrary choices of the same individual when faced with either budget. 33 Assume x 1 

> s

(or any other point in its containing line-segment) is chosen if faced with the salmon budget B s. The individual has revealed that they prefer this choice over x 1 

> t

because the latter is also in the salmon budget (p s x1 

> s

ě ps x1

> t

, i.e. x1 

> t

P Bs). We conclude that x 1 

> s

Rx 1

> t

. We cannot infer anything about x t because it is outside of the salmon budget. Because of the symmetry of the problem, we can also consider the teal budget B t. Again, no claims can be made about x s because it is not contained in it. However, we might infer x t Rx 1 

> s

or x 1 

> t

Rx 1 

> s

depending on which bundle was chosen (x 1 

> s

P Bt). In case of the latter, there is a cycle of mutual preference because from the salmon budget we concluded x1 

> s

Rx 1 

> t

and from the teal budget we concluded x 1 

> t

Rx 1

> s

. This is a violation of GARP, and ruled out by Assumption 4.(i). All other delegate bundles (xs, xt), (x1

> s

, xt), (xs, x1

> t

) are rational. 

To characterise singles and couples as types we invoke two fundamental, well-established results from the revealed preference literature. First, for singles, by Afriat (1967) and Varian (1982), the existence of a utility function defined in Assumption 4.(i) requires observed choices (xt, pt)Tt=1 to satisfy GARP. Second, for couples, by Cherchye et al. (2011), under Assumptions 4.(i) and 4.(ii), there exist personalised  

> 33 This is the simplest setting in which these axioms can produce behaviour inconsistent with utility optimisation. Because there are only two budgets, there are no cycles beyond violation of direct revealed preferences. We call this the weak axiom (or WARP).

17 continuous consumption bundles ( ˇxm, ˇ x f ) such that ˇ xm + ˇx f = x and both ( ˇxmt , pt)Tt=1

and ( ˇx ft , pt)Tt=1 satisfy GARP. 34 

For our heterogeneous population, this means that given a realisation of the pref-erence environment ω = ( ωm, ω f ) the axioms must hold for every household (As-sumption 4). Preference heterogeneity allows the revealed preference relation R and its transitive closure R (Definition 4) to be different for any two individuals even if they face the same prices. Thus, for κ P t m, f u, we write Rκ 

> i

” R(ωκ 

> i

) and Rκ 

> i

” R(ωκ 

> i

)

and define x Rκ 

> i

x1 if and only if (x, x1) P Rκ 

> i

Ď X ˆ X .35 For a fixed and finite number of budgets, the map R : ω Þ Ñ R(ω) is not injective even if utilities are. This means that there are individuals ω ‰ ω1 whose utilities are not empirically distinguishable even if they pick different continuous bundles when faced with the same budget. It is, thus, without loss for the test to treat their choice as equal. Consequently, a finite number of budgets only induces a finite number of revealed preference types. 36 

Definition 5 (Individual Types) . For normalised budgets and common prices, each choice path x = ( x1, . . . , xT ) P X T induces a revealed-preference relation Rκ Ď X ˆ X . We call two choice paths equivalent if they induce the same relation. The resulting finite partition of 

X T is denoted by ¯X κ, and each cell ξ P ¯X κ is called an individual revealed preference type. 37 

Knowing an individual’s revealed preference type answers all relevant revealed-preferred questions for any two x, x1 P X and, thus, describes the heterogeneous pref-erences of this individual, absent additional functional form restrictions. For singles i P N1 on either side of the matching market, ξi is directly observed from data. For couples i P N2, we think of household types as a latent pair of individual types in ¯X m ˆ ¯X f . For normalised prices, write demand functions from the previous section as (xmi (η), x f

> σ(i)

(η)) where η P (0, 1 ) is the endogenous relative share of endowment w. Then exact knowledge of ηiσ(i) determines both individual’s private consumption (xmi , x f

> σ(i)

) and, thus, their revealed preference types Rmi and 

R f 

> σ(i)

on the observed budgets. By Cherchye et al. (2011), under Assumption 4.(i)-(ii), 

Xiσ(i) ”

!

xmi (η), x f

> σ(i)

(η)



: η P Eiσ(i)

)

is non-empty. This implies that the generating Eiσ(i) Ď (0, 1 ) must also be non-empty. In general, the set is not a singleton, and any two couples’ discrete revealed-preference-types generated by this set, are observationally equivalent since they share the same set of feasible quantities Xiσ(i).   

> 34 Note that their characterisation also allows for public goods and consumption externalities.
> 35 Ralso depends on prices which we treat as fixed and the same for everyone by Assumption 5.
> 36 With choices on a dense set of budgets, we could recover preferences from observed choices (Mas-Colell, 1977, 1978). Since ω’s are ordinal preferences, the relation would then be one-to-one.
> 37 Each cell is the intersection of half-spaces induced by direct revealed preference comparisons.

18 Unfortunately, without imposing restrictions beyond Assumption 4, there is no unique way to partition this type space further, to accommodate sub-types based on each member’s revealed preference type (which is identified within a stable configu-ration). Thus, to discretise the space of configurations we have to make a choice. Two possibilities have been established in the literature. Either we pre-test the data for the existence of feasible quantities using the mixed integer approach in Cherchye et al. (2009, 2011), discard all couples for which Xiσ(i) is empty, and characterise couple’s types only via the binary relation on aggregate choices. Alternatively, we resort to a collection of necessary conditions based on hypothesised (revealed) preference relations ,listed in Definition 6 below. We choose the latter for the remainder of the paper, but also report results from both implementations, which we discuss in Section 5. 

Definition 6 (CARP) . If a collection of choices (pt, xt)Tt=1 satisfies the Collective Axiom of Revealed Preferences then there exist binary relations R , Hm, Hm, H f , H f Ď X ˆ X , s.t. (i) if x s R x t, then x s Hm xt or x s H f xt,(ii) if x s Hκ xu, x u Hκ xv, . . . , x z Hκ xt then x s Hκ xt for κ P t m, f u,(iii) if x s R x t and x t Hκ xs, then x s Hκ1

xt for κ ‰ κ1,(iv) if x s R (xt1 + xt2 ) and x t1 Hκ xs then x s Hκ1

xt2 for κ ‰ κ1,(v) if x s1 Hm xt and x s2 H f xt then ␣ (xt R (xs1 + xs2 )) ,(vi) if x s Hm xt and x s H f xt, then ␣ (xt R x s)

where x s R x t whenever p J 

> s

xs ě pJ 

> s

xt and Hκ is the transitive closure of H κ.38 

Cherchye et al., 2007 show that, under Assumptions 4.(i) and 4.(ii), the collective axiom (CARP) holds. Since this characterisation does not use individualised quan-tities, we have the additional requirement of items (iv) and (v) which rule out the situation where individuals have different preferences over bundles but as a house-hold they consume an inferior bundle when they could have afforded both. This is clearly a violation of efficiency. Importantly, each of the restrictions divides X T into two well-defined half-spaces. 

Definition 7 (Collective Types) . For normalised budgets and common prices, the finite collection of CARP-relevant inequalities induces a finite partition ¯X c of aggregate household choice paths x c = ( xc

> 1

, . . . , xcT ) P X T. Two household choice paths are in the same cell if they have the same revealed-preference pattern for all aggregate and double-sum comparisons appearing in Definition 6. We call each cell ξc P ¯X c a collective revealed preference type. 

These restrictions are fine enough to classify couples not only by the collective re-vealed preference type ξc P ¯X c induced by their observed aggregate choices (pt, xi,σ(i),t)Tt=1,  

> 38 Note that Ris a binary relation but does not correspond to an actual preference relation, since household consumption is the result of aggregation of individual preferences.

19 but also by the counterfactual revealed preference types assigned to their two mem-bers in a configuration. Hence, they allow us to replace the hypothesised relations by the respective singles’ actual revealed-preference relations within a given preference-stable configuration. This strengthens the requirement of collective rationality of the observed couple, i.e. existence of a feasible resource share η, to the configuration retaining rationality after the exchange with single preferences. By Lemma 3, the additional restrictions tighten the feasible set of resource shares, thus reducing the number of preference-stable configurations. 39 

With our definition of discrete types, many realisations of individual and collec-tive types are equivalent. Since transpositions that swap two individuals of the same type have no empirical content, we only have to sample matches based on revealed preference types rather than individual assignments. Thus we can discretise a con-figuration χi defined by (τm, τ f ) by a configuration type: 

θi ”



ξciσ(i), ξm

> τm(i)

, ξ f  

> τf(σ(i))



P Θ ” ¯X c ˆ ¯X m ˆ ¯X f , (4) where we denote the subset of preference-stable type configurations by Θ0 Ă Θ.The test statistic is derived in the next section. We finish this section with an example of a minimal economy that has power to detect failure of preference stability and a discussion of the dimension of the discrete type space. 

Example 1. Let us revisit a typical configuration of a household i P N2 with hypothetical partners randomised (τm, τ f ) „ ρ by returning to our example of Figure 2. We extend it by an third, umber budget u. 40 Let x m = xτm(i) be the single man (Apollo) consuming x ms , x mt ,and x mu . Further let x f = xτ f (σ(i)) be the single woman (Athena) consuming x fs , x ft , and x fu.The original couple (Zeus & Hera) is jointly consuming x cs, x ct , x cu where x c = xi,σ(i). As discussed in Lemma 3, we normalise budgets to one: p v xv = 1 for all v P t s, t, uu. Suppose the configuration satisfies the following inequalities, sufficient to characterise it in terms of revealed preference types, which can be checked against the conditions in Definition 6. pt xcs ě 1, pu xcs ě 1, ps(xct + xcu) ď 1 pt xms ď 1, pu xms ě 1 pt x fs ě 1, pu x fs ď 1

ps xct ě 1, pu xct ě 1, pt(xcs + xcu) ě 1 ps xmt ě 1, pu xmt ď 1 ps x ft ě 1, pu x ft ě 1

ps xcu ď 1, pt xcu ě 1, pu(xcs + xct ) ď 1 ps xmu ě 1, pt xmu ě 1 ps x fu ě 1, pt x fu ě 1

.Each of these inequalities defines a half-space in X . Households are characterised by which half contains their continuous choice, a consequence of their preferences. In this particular configuration, each type of household is rational, the couple is CARP-consistent, the man’s revelations x mt Rx ms and x mu Rx mt satisfy GARP, and the woman’s x fu Rx fs satisfies GARP. How-ever, the configuration is not preference-stable: the man’s x mt Rx ms and the woman’s x fu Rx fs

together imply, by item (v) of Definition 6, that the couple cannot have x cs R(xct + xcu).  

> 39 Appendix A.2.2 discusses the relationship between ηand the random utility representation.
> 40 The collective model is testable only when at least three goods and three budgets are available.

20 By counting the distinct sign patterns of this finite set of revealed-preference inequali-ties induced by intersecting the T budgets, we get the cardinality of unitary household types 

| ¯X s| = 2T(T´1) for s P t m, f u. For couples, we have to evaluate inequalities for double-sums according to Definition 6 (iv) & (v), which appear in the third column, adding another T (T´12 )

comparisons. In our case with T = 3, we have | ¯X c| = 26 ¨ 23 = 512 collective revealed prefer-ence types. In total, we thus have 512 ¨ 64 ¨ 64 = 221 = 2, 097, 152 configurations. Evaluating them computationally, 475, 136 are consistent with the collective axiom based on the necessary conditions from Definition 6 using only aggregate household consumption data. 41 Imposing preference stability, this further reduces to 2, 996 preference stable configurations. 

## Testing Preference Stability 

The finite-type characterisation of the random utility model (R.1) can be analysed within the stochastic choice setting of McFadden and Richter (1991), and McFadden (2005). Rationalisability of the model, defined in equation (R.2) below, asks whether the distribution of observed revealed preference types can be rationalised by a pop-ulation of deterministic preference-stable configuration types θ P Θ0. In Theorem 1, we showed that failure of rationalisability falsifies preference stability. 42 For the statistical test, we must account for the sampling uncertainty entering through the estimation of the, now discrete, conditional revealed preference type distribution ¯ π.For a configuration χ, defined in (2) we defined demand functions through the optimal choice rule (3), which we now explicitly let be dependent on prices through the budget constraints and write Ψp. Each of the resulting margins (xc, xm, x f ) is compatible with unitary, respectively, collective utility maximisation. Let p ” (pt)Tt=1

collect all prices and let x(p) ” (xc(p), xm(p), x f (p)) be the optimal demands of a given configuration where xκ ” (xκ 

> t

(pt)) Tt=1. We then apply the discretisation map 

∆ : X 3¨T Ñ Θ to the optimal demands x(p) of a configuration χ which maps to the unique equivalence class (Definitions 5 and 7) containing them. This determines the configuration type θ(χ, p) = ∆(Ψp(χ)) as a function of (observed) prices. Taking prices as given, θ defined in equation (4), is a deterministic function of the configuration χ. Hence we can define the observed distribution of discrete choices of households of type κ as the push-forward of the distribution of configurations ν‹:¯π (ξκ 

> i

= ξ) = ÿ

> θPΘ0

1 tproj κ (θ) = ξu ν∆(θ) = 

ż

> χPW0

1

!

θ(χ) P (proj κ )´1(ξ)

)

ν‹(dχ). (R.2)        

> 41 This leaves us with about 22.7% collectively rational types. From this, we should not necessarily conclude a restrictive nature of the collective model since for a given range of budget planes only a subset of the total choice set would actually be feasible (e.g. have positive demands).
> 42 By Lemma 3 and Definition 7, θ(W0)ĎΘ0. The inclusion may be strict, since the discrete char-acterisation is necessary but not sufficient for the underlying preference-stability restriction. The test based on Θ0therefore has correct size under H0but is conservative. We discuss this in Proposition 1.

21 This is an empirically tractable version of the random utility and matching model (R.1). The first equation of (R.2) defines a linear program. The data identifies only the marginal distributions of the observable revealed preference types appearing on the left-hand side of (R.2). The joint distribution over configurations is latent, but GARP, CARP, and preference stability restrict its support to the admissible set Θ0 Ă Θ.By Theorem 1, Hypothesis H0 implies the existence of a distribution ν‹ on W0

rationalising ¯π. Through the discretisation map θ(χ), this in turn implies that the discrete marginals are rationalisable by ν∆ = ν‹ ˝ θ´1 on Θ0. Proposition 1 charac-terises this discrete rationalisability and provides the basis for the test statistic. 

Proposition 1. Under Assumptions 1-5, the following statements are equivalent: (i) The marginal choice distributions ¯πc, ¯ πm, ¯ π f are rationalisable by a distribution sup-ported on the set of preference-stable configuration types Θ0 according to (R.2) .(ii) There exists ν∆ on the |Θ0|-dimensional unit simplex such that A ν∆ = ¯π, where the columns of A represent all preference-stable type configurations θ P Θ0.(iii) For ν = 0, the projection residual satisfies Jn( ¯π, ν) ” n min γPtAν∆|ν∆ěνu( ¯π ´ γ)T Ω( ¯π ´

γ) = 0 where Ω is a positive definite square weighting matrix. (iv) The vector ν∆ is a fixed point under the operation 

Γ ¯π,ν : s Þ Ñ max (0, s ´ diag (Hι)´1(Hs + f ( ¯π, ν))) (5) 

where H = AJΩA and f ( ¯π, ν) = ´AJΩ( ¯π ´ Aν).

We construct the matrix A in Aν∆ = ¯π, defined in Proposition 1.(ii), based on de-terministic configuration-types, i.e. with a typical column representing a preference-stable configuration, which vertically concatenates one-hot encodings of a male single type ( ξm), a female single type ( ξ f ), and a couple type ( ξc) each of them individually rational. Consequently, the matrix consists of ř   

> κPt c,f,mu

| ¯X κ| rows and |Θ0| columns, where | ¯X κ| is the number of different choices a household of a given kind can make. We then split A into 3 blocks of respective row-length | ¯X c|, | ¯X f | and | ¯X m| and denote by Aκ,¨,¨ each block of A. If household configuration θ P Θ0 (columns, indexed by l)yields type ξκ 

> j

for κ P t c, f , mu then Aκ,j,l = 1 and zero otherwise. Because there are many preference-stable configurations compared to the num-ber of individual types, the matrix A does not have full column-rank. Thus ν is not point-identified. Following Kitamura and Stoye (2018) we exploit Proposition 1.(iii) as the computational formulation for the condition (ii), in which we obtain γ by pro-jecting choice probabilities ¯π onto the linear cone enforcing the preference-stability constraints tAν : ν ě νu and define the test statistic as the corresponding projection residual. The case ν = 0 gives the population rationalisability condition, while infer-ence below uses tightened lower bounds. 22 Inference 

The vector of choice probabilities ¯ π is subject to sampling uncertainty. To obtain the sample statistic Jn( p¯πn, ν), we require a consistent estimator p¯πn of ¯ π. To obtain criti-cal values for the random quantity Jn( p¯πn, ν), we need a consistent approximation of the asymptotic distribution ?n( p¯πn ´ ¯π). In Theorem 1, we established the de Finetti representation, as a consequence of exchangeability of χ and uniform sampling of transpositions. This result immediately carries over to household types, due to the measurability of the map ∆ from configurations to configuration types θ. Hence, con-ditional on the permutation-invariant sigma-algebra I‹, observed revealed preference types are i.i.d. with probabilities ¯ πκ = ( ¯πκ 

> 1

, . . . , ¯ πκ   

> |¯Xκ|

) where ¯ πκ 

> j

” ¯π(ξκ 

> i

= ξκ 

> j

).Consequently, we can obtain a consistent estimator p¯πn for ¯π, by taking sample analogues of the discrete choice probabilities. Partitioning ¯ π the same way as a col-umn Aκ, we estimate the sample proportions of a given type by p¯πκ 

> n,j

= 1

> nκ

řnκ 

> i=1

1tξκ 

> i

=

ξκ 

> j

u where ξκ 

> i

is the revealed preference type of household i = 1 . . . nκ.To obtain the critical values for inference, we may use a non-parametric bootstrap. We construct a bootstrap sample p¯πbn for b = 1 . . . B. Because of many binding con-straints, inference requires a tuning parameter ν = τnι with τn Ñ 0 as n Ñ 8 .43 Let 

pγn,τn be the minimiser of (iii) under the tightened cone constraint. For each bootstrap draw b, we compute the centred choice probabilities p¯πbn,τn = p¯πbn ´ p¯πn + pγn,τn and eval-uate the test statistic Jn( p¯πbn,τn , ιτ n) to obtain their empirical distribution pFn,B,Jn . We now establish that the corresponding critical value yields an asymptotically valid test. 

Theorem 2. Under Assumptions 1-5 we have for α P (0, 12 ), vanishing tuning parameter 

τn Ñ 0, τn

?n Ñ 8 , and non-vanishing subpopulations nκ 

> n

Ñ cκ ą 0 for κ P t c, m, f u:

lim inf  

> nÑ8

inf  

> ¯πPt Aν:νě0u

P



Jn( p¯πn, τnι) ď pF´1 

> n,B,Jn

(1 ´ α)



= 1 ´ α. (6) 

Proof. We have to check the conditions of Kitamura and Stoye (2018). Their Assump-tion 4.1 requires that nκ /n does not converge to zero. Here, the number of singles and couples must grow at the same rate so that no subpopulation vanishes. For the analogue of their Assumption 4.2, random sampling of each observed distribution ¯πκ, we refer to Theorem 1 and measurability of θ, which, indeed, induces conditional i.i.d. marginals through the measurable function Ψ. We conclude that the within-pool bootstrap consistently approximates the conditional law of ?n( p¯πn ´ ¯π).Computing the test statistic requires repeated solution of a high-dimensional con-                     

> 43 We need this, because otherwise many parameters lie on the boundary of the parameter space. Without it, the bootstrap would not be valid (Andrews, 2000). τn=|Θ0|´1alog n/nis a tightening parameter that shifts out the cone from the origin where nis the minimum number of available observations among nc,nm,nfand ιis the vector of ones with dimension aligning with ν.We set bootstrap repetitions to B=500, and tune the tightening parameter τnbased on our simulation study.

23 strained quadratic problem. Rather than relying on generic sequential quadratic pro-gramming routines used for solving inequality constrained problems 44 , we rewrite the problem as non-negative least squares, exploit the sparsity of A, and implement a coordinate-wise projection method (Franc et al., 2005; Johansson et al., 2006). Equa-tion (5) in Proposition 1.(iv) defines the step and shows convergence. Finally, in our simulation study, we find that the test has power to detect an ”irra-tional“ population of close to one with 500 observations per household composition if only 15% of the population is not preference-stable. By doubling the sample size, the required proportion drops to 5%. In addition, we discuss worst cases by considering ”similar configurations“ and show correct size under different worst-case samples. 

# 5 Empirical Analysis 

In this section, we apply the test to three household panels that differ in data quality and measurement detail. Across all three datasets, the evidence points against stable preferences. Testing varying specifications, helps us understand the effects of price variation, sample size, and the assumptions of the model. We conclude by examining how these findings hold up against different extensions and robustness checks. 

## Data 

For the test we consider households consisting of singles or couples. We exclude households with children or other cohabiting groups of individuals who are not in a romantic relationship. We consider a minimal setting with three periods and three goods, where we have 64 types of singles and 512 types of couples, resulting in 2, 996 collectively rational preference-stable configuration types (see Example 1). Two of the panels we study are longer than necessary. For transparency, we report results for different combinations of years. After dropping incomplete cases, we order the year triplets by the resulting sample size. Due to attrition in panels, this pick out consecutive years. We face the trade-off between sample size and price variation. 45 

First, we apply the test to the time use and consumption module (Cherchye et al., 2012) from the Dutch LISS (Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social Sciences) panel. The panel is collected by CentERdata and consists of 5000 households and 8000 individuals, drawn from the population register of Statistics Netherlands. The survey is internet-based where households are provided with the necessary hardware     

> 44 This algorithm is used for lsqnonneg (Matlab) and optimize.nnls (SciPy).
> 45 A discussion about the effectiveness of revealed preference methods with respect to price variation can be found in Beatty and Crawford (2011).

24 to participate in the study. Prices are obtained from the Dutch CPI for different con-sumption categories published by Eurostat (normalized to 100 for the year 2005). We select the private consumption categories: clothing, food & beverages and recreation. Second, we consider phase two of the Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS), collected in form of personal interviews by the Carolina Population Center (University of North Carolina) and available for the years 1994 – 2014. Due to the amount of zeros observed for many private consumption expenditure categories, we focus on different categories of food. The survey distinguishes between 57 different food consumption categories, which we aggregate to dairy, bread and meat. These three categories account for more than half of the food consumption, which itself takes a large proportion of total expenditure. 46 Price data is obtained from the Federal State Statistics Service (GKS) and available for the years: 2000, 2005, 2010, 2011 – 2015. Third, we use data from the Spanish Continuous Family Expenditure Survey (ECPF), collected by the Spanish statistics office (INE) on a quarterly basis for the period 1985 – 2005. The survey is designed in a way that participants are part of the sample for at most eight consecutive periods or two years. There was a discontinuity in the design of the study in 1997, where the focus was shifted away from detailed consumption expenditure categories. The ECPF was replaced by the Encuesta de Pre-supuestos Familiares (EPF) in 2006, where the collection frequency was extended to yearly with participation lifespan of two years being maintained. Requiring a panel of at least three periods we, therefore, use data from the original ECPF from 1985 to 1996. We select the same goods as in the LISS panel: clothing, food consumed outside of the household, and consumption of non-durables. Price data is also published by INE. Descriptive statistics can be found in Tables 8 and 9 in Appendix A.5. 

## Results 

Table 1 presents the baseline results in the form of p-values for different combinations of periods. Rejection, indicated by a low p-value, corresponds to a violation of the stable-preference hypothesis. There is strong evidence to reject the stable-preference hypothesis for the LISS panel, for the RLMS and ECPF there are some combinations of periods for which there is not enough evidence to arrive at this conclusion. In these non-rejection cases, we either have three consecutive years in which we are faced with limited power of revealed preference axioms due to the lack of price variation, or a particularly 

> 46 We make use of a weak separability assumption that is standard in the empirical demand estima-tion literature which allows us to be able to consider a subset of goods for estimation. Later, we relax this by allowing for endogeneity of expenditure on the selected goods.

25 Table 1: Results for Private Goods with Exogenous Prices 

Longitudinal Internet studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) Years Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2009 2010 2012 605 598 463 380 0.000 Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS) Years Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2012 2013 2014 322 319 300 295 0.138 2011 2013 2014 309 308 275 272 0.112 2011 2012 2014 310 310 279 276 0.176 2011 2012 2013 328 328 308 305 0.128 2010 2013 2014 255 253 215 211 0.082 2010 2012 2014 252 251 218 215 0.042 2010 2012 2013 264 263 239 234 0.002 2010 2011 2013 264 264 235 234 0.156 2010 2011 2012 294 294 264 263 0.100 2005 2011 2012 256 256 212 208 0.082 Spanish Continuous Family Expenditure Survey (ECPF) Years Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 1994.3 1994.1 1994.2 106 104 5 3 0.076 1993.4 1994.1 1994.2 108 97 8 5 0.056 1992.2 1992.3 1992.1 93 89 15 14 0.004 1990.4 1991.1 1991.2 95 91 14 12 0.004 1989.3 1989.1 1989.2 107 103 4 3 0.024 1988.2 1988.3 1988.4 96 93 6 3 0.498 1987.1 1987.2 1987.3 124 120 8 6 0.128 1986.4 1987.1 1987.2 154 149 9 5 0.440 1986.3 1986.4 1987.1 129 121 7 6 0.006 1986.3 1986.4 1986.2 125 124 9 9 0.050     

> Note: Number of total couples, rational couples according to aggregate CARP, total singles and ra-tional singles according to GARP, for different combinations of periods. Sampling for the ECPF is quarterly, for which we use the year.quarter notation.

small sample size due to the wider span of considered years in combination with attrition. This all points towards the trade-off discussed above. For the RLMS, the food-bundle specification is, perhaps, more prone to habit formation. The test rejects there only at the 10% level. The sample for the ECPF is very small, particularly for single households. Abstracting from the inferior statistical properties of the test in small samples (we still have numerical convergence), the strong rejection of the hypothesis may reflect a finite-sample support issue, i.e. it is harder to rationalise the choice distributions when we observe zero probability for some single types. 26 Table 2: Results Conditional on Demographics for Private Goods, Exogenous Prices 

Longitudinal Internet studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) Years College Age Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2009 2010 2012 1 2 92 90 79 71 0.138 2009 2010 2012 1 1 163 162 93 75 0.000 2009 2010 2012 1 0 65 65 64 56 0.142 2009 2010 2012 0 2 137 134 121 97 0.000 2009 2010 2012 0 1 114 113 85 65 0.002 2009 2010 2012 0 0 34 34 21 16 0.004 Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS) Years Age Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2010 2011 2012 2 77 77 119 114 0.010 2010 2011 2012 1 161 160 105 105 0.122 2010 2011 2012 0 56 56 40 39 0.026 2011 2012 2013 2 77 77 136 130 0.232 2011 2012 2013 1 193 190 127 127 0.026 2011 2012 2013 0 55 54 42 42 0.020 2012 2013 2014 2 75 75 133 128 0.000 2012 2013 2014 1 196 191 131 128 0.002 2012 2013 2014 0 49 49 34 33 0.024  

> Note: Number of total couples, rational couples according to aggregate CARP, total singles and ratio-nal singles according to GARP, for consecutive periods and demographics.

Next, Table 2 reports results of the test which takes into account matching on edu-cation and age, by conditioning on these observed demographics. We limit ourselves to consecutive years, in which these demographics are likely to be stable over time. 47 

While we observe these characteristics for both spouses, we only look at assortatively matched couples, i.e. couples in which individuals fall into the same education and age category. 48 Assortative matching accounts for almost all of the couples in the sample. We define education as a binary variable indicating whether the individual has completed higher education (college) or not, and age as a categorical variable with three classes: t0 : age ă 40, 1 : 40 ď age ď 60, 2 : age ą 60 u. We repeat the analysis, for all combinations of education and age, only for the LISS panel and RLMS. Rejections go through across all non-college subpopulations whereas only the middle-aged subsample of college-educated couples rejects.  

> 47 In large enough samples, this could easily be carried out with time-dependent demographics, however such an approach would suffer from the curse of dimensionality, and we already have to manage a relatively small sample size for the RLMS.
> 48 For non-assortative matching, we would have to change the randomisation procedure over type transpositions to one that retains the observed matching pattern. For example, for a couple with a low educated man, and a high educated woman we would only consider swaps with single men and women within the same respective demographic category. The theory goes through.

27 Extensions and Robustness 

In this section we discuss how we can weaken the no-consumption-externalities as-sumption, deal with endogeneity of budgets, and discuss a different characterisation of the collective axiom. We elaborate on the corresponding empirical results and refer the interested reader to the tables in Appendix A.4. 

Public Goods To account for arbitrary consumption externalities, we augment the random utility and matching model with a Barten (1964) linear consumption tech-nology, famously adapted to the collective model by Browning et al. (2013). Then household (i, σ(i)) maximises max   

> xf,xm

!

λiσ(i)(pt)umi (xm) + ( 1 ´ λiσ(i)(pt)) u fi (x f )

)

s.t. D(x f + xm) P Biσ(i)t =

!

x | pJ 

> t

x ď wiσ(i)t

)

where D is a production technology matrix. It is commonly assumed to be diagonal, restricting complementarities between consumption externalities. Its elements range from 0.5 for an entirely public good for which both individuals pay half of the prices, to 1.0 for an entirely private good for which individuals pay market prices. The pro-duction technology matrix D is not identified without restrictions on heterogeneity or the functional form of utilities. Thus we will calibrate D from estimates of Cherchye et al. (2017), a study conducted using the LISS panel. 49 

For the empirical specification, we select the aggregate goods housing, transport, and energy , with corresponding Barten scales: diag (D) = ( 0.683, 0.692, 0.748 ), which, arguably, represent goods subject to consumption externalities taking values about half way on the spectrum from public to private. They are equally available in the LISS and the RLMS. For the ECPF we use a hybrid specification using clothing, trans-portation, and petrol , with Barten scales: diag (D) = ( 1.00, 0.683, 0.748 ). We obtain house price indices (HPI) from the same sources as the respective CPIs. Table 4 (no demographics) and Table 5 (by education and age) in Appendix A.4 report the results. Despite the much larger dataset, which appears due to fewer boundary cases, the evidence is not as clear as for the private goods. This could be due to the additional homogeneity restriction imposed by the Barten technology, which is assumed to be the same for all households. Despite this, we still reject the stable preference hypothesis for most datasets for a 10% significance level. 

> 49 A promising approach is adopted by Gauthier (2025) who uses the assignable consumption in the LISS panel, to extend the collective axiom to incorporate a household production function. One could, theoretically, use these extended axioms to allow for more general forms of the production technology, in line with the non-parametric nature of the test. We leave this for future research.

28 Endogeneity of Total Expenditure Total expenditure may be endogenous. In partic-ular, we may think of it as determined by household income yiσ(i) and an unobserved taste shifter ζiσ(i) = ζ(ωmi , ω f

> σ(i)

), a one-dimensional summary of preferences captur-ing the household’s propensity to allocate resources toward the goods we study: 

wiσ(i) = g(yiσ(i), ζiσ(i)).The relationship is unconstrained, other than g being strictly increasing in its sec-ond argument. Income may itself depend on (ωmi , ω f

> σ(i)

) through channels such as labour supply and human capital. We follow the standard assumption that ζiσ(i) is orthogonal to those channels. Following Imbens and Newey (2009), we exploit the monotonicity of g to define the control function viσ(i) as the rank of total expenditure, given income, through the conditional CDF: 

viσ(i) = FW|Y



wiσ(i) | yiσ(i)



= Fζ|Y



ζiσ(i) | yiσ(i)



.Conditioning on this control function absorbs the endogenous component of total ex-penditure. We obtain estimates using the empirical conditional distribution function: ˆviσ(i) = pFW|Y (wiσ(i) | yiσ(i)). Since this quantity is continuous, we implement condi-tioning by a kernel. In particular, for a grid v0 P t 0.05, 0.15, . . . , 0.95 u and bandwidth 

h = 120 , we report the test statistic and corresponding p-values for the sub-samples 

t(i, σ(i)) : ˆ viσ(i) P [v0 ´ h, v0 + h]u.The results are shown in Table 6 of Appendix A.4. Conditioning on small cells substantially reduces the effective sample size and removes much of the variation used by the test, so these results should be interpreted as conservative. For the LISS panel, we find that we still reject for more than half of these sub-samples in the private good case, but in only about a quarter of the cases for public goods. 

Conditioning on Observable Resource Shares Whenever resource sharing is ob-served, as in the LISS panel, we may split the sample into brackets of similar individ-ual expenditure on private goods and match partnered individuals only with singles in the corresponding expenditure bracket. In such a setting, singles are then used as benchmarks for partnered individuals only if they have similar private expenditure levels. This is best interpreted as a robustness exercise. It checks whether the rejection is driven by comparing households at very different individual budget levels. Table 3 in Appendix A.4 reports the results for the LISS panel. Based on private expenditure terciles we classify their private expenditure categories on the selected goods as low, mid, and high. We only look at equal-splitting couples which account for most of the sample. While they would be economically interesting cases, we do not report off-diagonals, in which there is unequal splitting between the spouses, due to the small sample size and the arising curse of dimensionality. The results reveal that the test rejects for the mid- and high-expenditure subsamples but not for 29 the low-expenditure subsample. The non-rejection at the low end is consistent with low-spending households allocating expenditure on these goods toward necessities, where choices are largely determined by budget rather than taste. 

Mixed Integer Programming Approach In this paper, we used restrictions from Definition 6 to define collectively rational household types. One might use a stronger characterisation based on both spouses satisfying individual GARP. Such a charac-terisation relies on recovering feasible quantities ˇ xmiσ(i) and ˇ x fiσ(i) for each household. Cherchye et al. (2011) provide a mixed integer programming procedure to recover these individualised quantities. We also implement their procedure. It allows us to check whether personalised quantities exist and, thus, if a given household can be rationalised. Beyond that, it can characterise a couples’ revealed preference type solely on the aggregate-choice GARP partition, with no further structure available to interact with singles’ types in a configuration. Thus, all the bite of the restrictions from the collective model is used in the pre-testing, and cannot be exploited further in conjunction with the single’s preferences, in the same way as the baseline char-acterisation. This will result in a larger set of preference-stable configurations, and thus, easier rationalisability of the observed choice distributions. We might, thus, expect less power of the test to detect violations of the stable preference hypothesis. The results, reported in Table 7 in Appendix A.4, confirm this conjecture for private goods but the test does remarkably well for public goods. 

# 6 Conclusion 

This paper asks whether the preferences individuals reveal as singles can also explain their behaviour in couples. The comparison is not immediate because singles are observed as unitary households, whereas couples are observed only through joint choices. With preference heterogeneity, stability is not a household-by-household restriction but a population restriction: matching may affect who becomes single or partnered, and who is matched with whom, but under the null it must not change the distribution of underlying preferences across the single and partnered pools. Although we observe only the separate demand distributions of couples, single men, and single women, the null restricts the latent structure that can rationalise them jointly. We place these objects in a common framework in which each observed couple is compared with counterfactual single men and women. Such configurations are admissible only if collective rationality is preserved after replacing the couple’s latent individual preferences by the preferences revealed by those singles. Preference stability requires the observed demand distributions to admit a rationalisation us-30 ing only admissible configurations. If no such rationalisation exists, the preferences revealed by singles cannot rationalise the behaviour of couples. We apply the test to the Dutch LISS, the Russian RLMS, and the Spanish ECPF. In the baseline specification with private goods and exogenous expenditure, all three datasets provide evidence against preference stability. The rejection largely remains after conditioning on observed demographics, where sufficient observations are avail-able, while specifications allowing public goods or endogenous expenditure produce more mixed results. 

# References 

Adams , A., L. C herchye , B. D e Rock , and E. V erriest (2014): “Consume now or later? Time inconsistency, collective choice, and revealed preference,” American Economic Review , 104, 4027–4070. Afriat , S. (1967): “The construction of utility functions from expenditure data,” In-ternational Economic Review , 8, 67–77. Aguiar , V. H. and N. K ashaev (2021): “Stochastic Revealed Preferences with Mea-surement Error,” The Review of Economic Studies , 88, 2042–2093. Andrews , D. W. (2000): “Inconsistency of the Bootstrap when a Parameter is on the Boundary of the Parameter Space,” Econometrica , 68, 399–405. Apps , P. and R. R ees (1988): “Taxation and the Household,” Journal of Public Eco-nomics , 35, 355–369. Apps , P. F. and R. R ees (1997): “Collective Labor Supply and Household Production,” 

Journal of Political Economy , 105, 178–190. Banks , J., R. B lundell , and A. L ewbel (1997): “Quadratic Engel Curves and Con-sumer Demand,” Review of Economics and Statistics , 79, 527–539. Barten , A. P. (1964): Family composition, prices and expenditure patterns , Netherlands School of Economics, netherland ed. Beatty , T. and I. C rawford (2011): “How demanding is the revealed preference approach to demand?” American Economic Review , 101, 2782–2795. Becker , G. S. (1965): “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” The Economic Journal , 75, 493–517. ——— (1973): “A Theory of Marriage: Part I,” Journal of Political Economy , 81, 813–846. 31 ——— (1981): “Altruism in the Family and Selfishness in the Market Place,” Econom-ica , 48, 1–15. Block , H. D. and J. M arschak (1959): “Random orderings and stochastic theories of responses,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper , 66, 1–69. Blow , L., M. B rowning , and I. C rawford (2021): “Non-parametric Analysis of Time-Inconsistent Preferences,” Review of Economic Studies , 88, 2687–2734. Botosaru , I., C. M uris , and K. P endakur (2023): “Identification of time-varying transformation models with fixed effects, with an application to unobserved het-erogeneity in resource shares,” Journal of Econometrics , 232, 576–597. Browning , M., F. B ourguignon , P.-A. C hiappori , and V. L echene (1994): “Income and outcomes: a structural model of intrahousehold allocation,” Journal of Political Economy , 102, 1067–1096. Browning , M. and P.-A. C hiappori (1998): “Efficient Intra-Household Allocations: A General Characterization and Empirical Tests,” Econometrica , 66, 1241–1278. Browning , M., P.-A. C hiappori , and A. L ewbel (2013): “Estimating consumption economies of scale, adult equivalence scales, and household bargaining power,” 

Review of Economic Studies , 80, 1267–1303. Brugler , J. (2016): “Testing preference stability between couples and singles,” Eco-nomics Letters , 142, 15–17. Calvi , R. (2020): “Why Are Older Women Missing in India? The Age Profile of Bargaining Power and Poverty,” Journal of Political Economy , 128, 2453–2501. Cherchye , L., B. D e Rock , and F. V ermeulen (2007): “The collective model of house-hold consumption: a nonparametric characterization,” Econometrica , 75, 553–574. ——— (2009): “Opening the black box of intra-household decision-making,” Journal of Political Economy , 117, 1074–1104. ——— (2011): “The Revealed Preference Approach to Collective Consumption Be-haviour: Testing and Sharing Rule Recovery,” The Review of Economic Studies , 78, 176–198. ——— (2012): “Married with children: A collective labor supply model with detailed time use and intrahousehold expenditure information,” American Economic Review ,102, 3377–3405. 32 Cherchye , L., T. D emuynck , B. D e Rock , and F. V ermeulen (2017): “Household consumption when the marriage Is stable,” American Economic Review , 107, 1507– 1534. Chiappori , P.-A. (1988): “Rational household labor supply,” Econometrica , 56, 63–90. ——— (1992): “Collective labor supply and welfare,” Journal of Political Economy , 100, 437–467. ——— (2020): “The Theory and Empirics of the Marriage Market,” Annual Review of Economics , 12, 547–578. Chiappori , P.-A. and O. D onni (2009): “Non-unitary models of household behavior: A survey of the literature,” IZA Discussion papers .Chiappori , P.-A., O. D onni , and I. K omunjer (2012): “Learning from a Piece of Pie,” 

The Review of Economic Studies , 79, 162–195. Chiappori , P.-A. and I. E keland (2006): “The micro economics of group behavior: General characterization,” Journal of Economic Theory , 130, 1–26. ——— (2009): “The Microeconomics of Efficient Group Behavior: Identification,” 

Econometrica , 77, 763–799. Chiappori , P.-A., C. M eghir , and Y. O kuyama (2025): “Intra-Household Welfare In-equality and Household Public Goods,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper , cowles Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University. Cornes , R. (1992): Duality and Modern Economics , Cambridge University Press. 

de Finetti , B. (1931): “Funzione caratteristica di un fenomeno aleatorio,” Atti della R. Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Ser. 6, Memorie Classe di Scienze Fisiche, Matematiche e Naturali , 4, 251–299. Deb , R., Y. K itamura , J. K. Q uah , and J. S toye (2017): “Revealed Price Preference: Theory and Empirical Analysis,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper , 1, 1–22. Dette , H., S. H oderlein , and N. N eumeyer (2016): “Testing multivariate economic restrictions using quantiles: the example of Slutsky negative semidefiniteness,” 

Journal of Econometrics , 191, 129–144. Dunbar , G., A. L ewbel , and K. P endakur (2013): “Children’s resources in collec-tive households: identification, estimation, and an application to child poverty in Malawi,” American Economic Review , 103, 438–471. 33 ——— (2021): “Identification of Random Resource Shares in Collective Households Without Preference Similarity Restrictions,” Journal of Business and Economic Statis-tics , 92, 402–421. Franc , V., V. H lavac , and M. N avara (2005): “Sequential coordinate-wise algorithm for the non-negative least squares problem,” Computer Analysis of Images and Pat-terns , 3691, 407–414. Galichon , A. (2021): “The unreasonable effectiveness of optimal transport in eco-nomics,” 1–44. Gauthier , C. (2025): “Production Heterogeneity in Collective Labor Supply Models with Children,” arXiv .Gayle , G.-L. and A. S hephard (2019): “Optimal Taxation, Marriage, Home Produc-tion, and Family Labour Supply,” Econometrica , 87, 291–326. Gorman , W. M. (1976): Tricks with Utility Functions , Cambridge University Press. Hewitt , E. and L. J. S avage (1955): “Symmetric Measures on Cartesian Products,” 

Transactions of the American Mathematical Society , 80, 470–501. Hoderlein , S. and J. S toye (2014): “Revealed preferences in a heterogeneous popu-lation,” Review of Economics and Statistics , 96, 197–213. Hsieh , H.-Y., A. L ewbel , and K. P endakur (2024): “Economies of Scale to Consump-tion in Collective Households,” Unpublished Manuscript .Hubner , S. (2023): “Identification of unobserved distribution factors and preferences in the collective household model,” Journal of Econometrics , 234, 301–326. Hurwicz , L. and H. U zawa (1971): “On the integrability of demand functions,” in 

Preferences, utility and demand , New York, Chapter 6. Imbens , G. and W. N ewey (2009): “Identification and estimation of triangular simul-taneous equations models without additivity,” Econometrica , 77, 1481–1512. Johansson , B., T. E lfving , V. K ozlov , Y. C ensor , P.-E. F orssen , and G. G ranlund 

(2006): “The application of an oblique-projected Landweber method to a model of supervised learning,” Mathematical and Computer Modelling , 43, 892–909. Kallenberg , O. (1997): Foundations of Modern Probability , Probability and Its Appli-cations, New York: Springer-Verlag. Kechris , A. S. (1995): Classical Descriptive Set Theory , no. 156 in Graduate Texts in Mathematics, New York: Springer. 34 Kitamura , Y. and J. S toye (2018): “Nonparametric Analysis of Random Utility Mod-els: Testing,” Econometrica , 86, 1883–1909. Koida , N. and K. S hirai (2024): “A Dual Approach to Nonparametric Characteriza-tion for Random Utility Models,” arXiv Working Paper , arXiv preprint. Lechene , V., K. P endakur , and A. W olf (2022): “OLS Estimation of the Intra-Household Distribution of Consumption,” Journal of Political Economy , 130, 681–731. Lewbel , A. and X. L in (2022): “Identification of Semiparametric Model Coefficients, with an Application to Collective Households,” Journal of Econometrics , 226, 205– 223. Lewbel , A. and K. P endakur (2008): “Estimation of collective household models with Engel curves,” Journal of Econometrics , 147, 350–358. ——— (2022): “Inefficient Collective Households: Cooperation and Consumption,” 

The Economic Journal , 132, 1882–1893. ——— (2026): “Is Shelter Really a Public Good Within Households?” Unpublished manuscript. Low , H., C. M eghir , L. P istaferri , and A. V oena (2018): “Marriage, Labor Supply and the Dynamics of the Social Safety Net,” . Mas -C olell , A. (1977): “The Recoverability of Consumers’ Preferences from Market Demand Behavior,” Econometrica , 45, 1409–1430. ——— (1978): “On Revealed Preference Analysis,” The Review of Economic Studies , 45, 121–131. Mazzocco , M., C. R uiz , and S. Y amaguchi (2014): “Labor Supply and Household Dynamics,” American Economic Review , 104. McFadden , D. (2005): “Revealed stochastic preference: a synthesis,” Economic Theory ,26, 245–264. McFadden , D. and M. R ichter (1991): “Stochastic rationality and revealed stochastic preference,” in Preferences, Uncertainty, and Optimality , ed. by J. Chipman, D. Mc-Fadden, and M. Richter., Boulder: Westview Press, 161–186. Rotman , J. J. (1994): An Introduction to the Theory of Groups , no. 148 in Graduate Texts in Mathematics, New York: Springer, 4th ed. Shapley , L. S. and M. S hubik (1971): “The assignment game I: The core,” International Journal of Game Theory , 1, 111–130. 35 Smeulders , B., L. C herchye , and B. D e Rock (2021): “Nonparametric Analysis of Random Utility Models: Computational Tools for Statistical Testing,” Econometrica ,89, 437–455. Sokullu , S. and C. V alente (2022): “Individual Consumption in Collective House-holds: Identification Using Repeated Observations with an Application to PRO-GRESA,” Journal of Applied Econometrics , 37, 286–304. Theloudis , A., J. V elilla , P.-A. C hiappori , J. I. G im ´enez -N adal , and J. A. M olina 

(2025): “Commitment and the Dynamics of Household Labour Supply,” The Eco-nomic Journal , 135, 354–386. Turansick , C. (2025): “An Alternative Approach for Nonparametric Analysis of Ran-dom Utility Models,” arXiv Working Paper , arXiv preprint, version 5. Varian , H. (1982): “The nonparametric approach to demand analysis,” Econometrica ,50, 945–73. Villani , C. (2009): Optimal Transport: Old and New , no. 338 in Grundlehren der math-ematischen Wissenschaften, Berlin: Springer. Voena , A. (2015): “Yours, mine, and ours: Do divorce laws affect the intertemporal behavior of married couples?” American Economic Review , 105, 2295–2332. 

# A.1 Proofs 

## Proof of Lemma 1

We start with a more general model in which cardinal utility might depend on the partner. For this we let uij = gcij (ui) = aij ui + bij , where aij ą 0. From e.g. Apps and Rees (1997), the men’s problem can be written as a unitary problem with the female partner’s reservation utility as a constraint: 

(xm˚ 

> it

, x f ˚ 

> it

) = arg max    

> (xm,xf)PX2

umij (xm) s.t. p(xm + x f ) ď wij , u fij (x f ) ě u fij (x f ˚ 

> ij

).Letting u˚ 

> 0, ij

= u(ω fj , x f ˚ 

> ij

) we write the Lagrangian 

L(xm, x f , μij , ρij ; ω) = gcij (u(ωmi , xm)) + μij (wij ´ p(xm + x f )) + ρij (gcij (u(ω fj , x f )) ´ gcij (u˚

> 0, ij

)) .For optimal consumption (xm˚ 

> ij

, x f ˚ 

> ij

), the Lagrange multipliers (μij , ρij ) satisfy 

∇u gcij (u(ωmi , xm˚ 

> ij

)) ∇xm u(ωmi , xm˚ 

> ij

) = μij p,

ρij ∇u gcij (u(ω fj , x f ˚ 

> ij

)) ∇x f u(ω fj , x f ˚ 

> ij

) = μij p.36 Equating the right-hand sides: 

∇u gcij (u(ωmi , xm˚ 

> ij

)) ∇xm u(ωmi , xm˚ 

> ij

) = ρij ∇u gcij (u(ω fj , x f ˚ 

> ij

)) ∇x f u(ω fj , x f ˚ 

> ij

). (7) Since ∇u gcij (z) = aij is constant, and we can simplify equation (7) to 

∇xm u(ωmi , xm˚ 

> ij

) = ρij ∇x f u(ω fj , x f ˚ 

> ij

).Thus, we can solve for ρij which does not depend on aij or bij , and thus gcij . Defining the Pareto weight λij = λ(ωmi , ω fj ) = 11+ρij such that ρij = 1´λij  

> λij

, the λij -re-weighted version of the total derivative of the Lagrangian becomes 

λij ∇xm u(ωmi , xm)dx m + ( 1 ´ λij )∇x f u(ω fj , x f )dx f + κij p(dx m + dx f ) = 0where κij ” λij μij , which coincides with the problem in equation (1). 

## Corollary 1

Corollary 1 (Representation of Unitary Utilities) . For any individual i, on either side of the market and any dummy partner j P N0, consider the dyad (i, j) with the dummy partner’s private bundle fixed at 0 P X . Under Assumptions 3, 4, there exist strictly increasing, affine functions h i, hj such that 

Φi0(xm, 0, p) = hi(ui(xm), p) and Φ0j(0, x f , p) = hj(uj(x f ), p).

Proof. Fix i, prices p and income w. Let xm P X be individual i’s private consumption. Since x is private to i the j-side terms in household utilities do not depend on x and we can set x f = 0: 

Φij (xm, x f ) = λ(ωmi , ω fj )u(ωmi , xm) + C(ωmi , ω fj , x f ),For any xm 

> 0

, xm 

> 1

, x f 

> 0

P X , we have ui(xm 

> 1

; ωmi ) ´ ui(xm 

> 0

; ωmi ) ą 0 if and only if 

Φij (xm 

> 1

, x f 

> 0

) ´ Φij (xm 

> 0

, x f 

> 0

) = λ(ωmi , ω fj )[ ui(xm 

> 1

) ´ ui(xm 

> 0

)] ą 0, because λ(ωmi , ω fj ) ą 0 and Cij cancels. Both Φij and ui are differentiable in xm.Setting xm 

> 1

= xm 

> 0

+ h and dividing both sides by h ą 0 and taking limits yields: 

ddx m Φ(xm, x f ; ωmi , ω fj ) = λ(ωmi , ω fj ) ddx m u(xm; ωmi ).Integrating both sides over xm and setting ω fj = ω0, since j P N0 proofs the claim. 

## Proof of Lemma 2

Let N(ω) = ( N2(ω), N1(ω), N0) be a matching allocation for a given population induced by the assignment matrix M. The realised partition for our population is denoted as N. By Assumption 3, the primitive environment is exchangeable ex-ante with respect to the group G0 ˆ G0 (every real individual’s preferences is not tied to their identity). By permutation equivariance of the matching rule by Assumption 1, 37 relabelling the primitive environment only relabels the matching outcome and hence the induced partition. In particular, 

N(( ςm, ς f ) ¨ ω) = ( ςm, ς f ) ¨ N(ω).Now, once the realised partition N is fixed, only those relabellings that preserve 

N remain admissible. These are exactly the elements of the stabiliser: 

G = tς P G0 : ς(Nℓ) = Nℓ, ℓ = 0, 1, 2 u .The stabiliser is the subgroup fixing the realised partition, whose orbit is the set of all relabelled partitions (Rotman, 1994, p. 56). If (ςm, ς f ) P G ˆ G, then the event N(ω) = 

N is unchanged by relabelling, so the primitive exchangeability from Assumption 3 carries over within the realised pools. This gives part (i). By Assumption 1, the matching rule M is permutation equivariant, and the sur-plus map Φ inherits the same relabelling from the primitive environment. Hence the composition σω ” M(Φ(ω)) is permutation equivariant under G0 ˆ G0. After fixing the partition N, this again restricts to the subgroup G ˆ G, proving part (ii). No larger symmetry is available in general. Once the realised partition is fixed, individual identities remain irrelevant within a given pool, but not across pools. Any relabelling outside G moves at least one individual from single to partnered or vice versa, and therefore changes the selection into household type. It maps tN(ω) = 

Nu to a different conditioning event. Thus, after the realised partition is fixed, the surviving symmetry group is precisely the within-pool relabelling group, namely the stabiliser G ˆ G.

## Proof of Lemma 3

By Chiappori and Ekeland (2009) we can split up the collective problem into two stages. In the first stage households agree on the male resource share wm(p, w).In the second stage, they solve an individual standard consumption problem with endowment wm and w f , respectively. Denoting the corresponding solutios as xm and 

x f , we can write aggregate demand as: 

x(p, w) = xm(p, wm(p, w)) + x f (p, w ´ wm(p, w)) .Following Browning and Chiappori (1998), we write the pseudo-Slutsky matrix for the household as: ¯S(p, w) ” Bx

B pJ (p, w) + Bx

Bw (p, w) x(p, w)J.Differentiating demands we obtain 

Bx

B pJ = Bxm

B pJ + Bx f

B pJ + ( Bxm

Bwm ´ Bx f

B(w ´ wm) ) Bwm

B pJ

38 and 

Bx

Bw = Bxm

Bwm

Bwm

Bw + Bx f

B(w ´ wm) (1 ´ Bwm

Bw ).Hence ¯S = Bxm

B pJ + Bx f

B pJ + ( Bxm

Bwm ´ Bx f

B(w ´ wm) ) Bwm

B pJ

+ [ Bxm

Bwm

Bwm

Bw + Bx f

B(w ´ wm) (1 ´ Bwm

Bw )]( xm + x f )J.Expanding the last term and rearranging yields the individual Slutsky matrices: ¯Sm(p, wm) ” Bxm(p, wm)

B pJ + Bxm(p, wm)

Bwm xm(p, wm)J

and ¯S f (p, w ´ wm) ” Bx f (p, w ´ wm)

B pJ + Bx f (p, w ´ wm)

B(w ´ wm) x f (p, w ´ wm)J.Consequently, the household pseudo-Slutsky matrix can be written as: ¯S(p, w) = ¯Sm(p, wm) + ¯S f (p, w ´ wm) + U(p, w)V(p, w)J,where 

U(p, w) ” Bxm

Bwm ´ Bx f

B(w ´ wm)

and 

V(p, w)J ” Bwm

B pJ + Bwm

Bw (x f )J ´ (1 ´ Bwm

Bw )( xm)J.Now define the relative male resource share η(p, w) ” wm(p,w) 

> w

P (0, 1 ). By Lemma 1, the Pareto weight is homogeneous of degree zero in (p, w). Hence a propor-tional rescaling (p, w) Þ Ñ (tp , tw ) leaves the real budget set and the Pareto weight and the corresponding resource allocation unchanged. Under Walras’ law, the male budget share is exhausted, so wm(p, w) = pJxm(p, w). It follows immediately that 

wm(tp , tw ) = tw m(p, w). Thus wm is homogeneous of degree one, and η(p, w) = 

wm(p, w)/w is homogeneous of degree zero. Writing budget-normalised prices as 

q = p/w, we may write η(p, w) = η(q, 1 ), and denote this value by η(q).By homogeneity of Marshallian demands xm and x f , the individual Slutsky ma-trices are homogeneous of degree ´1. 50 For each κ P t m, f u, define the unit-budget individual Slutsky matrix by Sκ (r) ” ¯Sκ (r, 1 ), where r denotes the individual unit-budget price vector. Then, for any individual expenditure y ą 0, ¯Sκ (p, y) = 1

y ¯Sκ

 py , 1 



= 1

y Sκ

 py



.             

> 50 Take x(αp,αw) = x(p,w)to be homogeneous of degree zero. Differentiating yields, by the chain rule, Bx
> BpJ(αp,αw) = 1
> αBx
> BpJ(p,w), and similarly for Bx/Bw.

39 With q = p/w, wm = wη(q), and w f = w ´ wm = w(1 ´ η(q)) , it follows that ¯Sm(p, wm) = 1

wη(q) Sm

 q

η(q)



, ¯S f (p, w f ) = 1

w(1 ´ η(q)) S f

 q

1 ´ η(q)



.The income-effect vector U(p, w) is also homogeneous of degree ´1 making wU (p, w)

homogeneous of degree zero. Similarly, since wm(p, w) is homogeneous of degree one, its derivatives with respect to p and w are homogeneous of degree zero. Together with homogeneity of individual demands, this implies that V(p, w) is homogeneous of degree zero. Thus both wU (p, w) and V(p, w) depend on (p, w) only through 

q = p/w. We therefore define u(q) ” wU (p, w) and v(q) ” V(p, w) such that: 

w U (p, w)V(p, w)J = u(q)v(q)J.Multiplying equation (A.1.4) by w therefore yields the unit-budget representation 

S(q) ” w ¯S(p, w) = 1

η(q) Sm

 q

η(q)



+ 11 ´ η(q) S f

 q

1 ´ η(q)



+ u(q)v(q)J.Now take a preference-stable configuration (i, j, i1, j1). By definition, ωmi = ωmi1 and 

ω fj = ω fj1 . The primitive ωmi determines the individual utility umi , and ω fj determines 

u fj . Under collective rationality, these same primitives jointly determine the Pareto weight λij and hence the induced share ηij . Therefore the factual individuals i and j

and the counterfactual singles i1 and j1 share the same individual demand systems, evaluated at the same normalised individual budgets. Hence 

Smi

p

ηij (p)

!

= Si10

p

ηij (p)

!

, S fj

p

1 ´ ηij (p)

!

= S0j1

p

1 ´ ηij (p)

!

.Writing everything on the unit budget therefore gives 

Sij (p) = 1

ηij (p) Si10

p

ηij (p)

!

+ 11 ´ ηij (p) S0j1

p

1 ´ ηij (p)

!

+ uij (p)vij (p)J

= ¯Si10(p, ηij (p)) + ¯S0j1 (p, 1 ´ ηij (p)) + uij (p)vij (p)J.which is the final representation. 

## Lemma 4

Lemma 4. Let Assumptions 1-4 hold. If configurations are sampled (τm, τ f ) „ ρ, indepen-dent of ω „ μ, and label-invariant, the sequence of configurations, defined in equation (2) , is within-pool-exchangeable: tχiuiPN2

> d

= tχς(i)uiPN2 for ς P G. Proof. By Lemma 2, 

σω1 ” (M ˝ Φ)( ω1) = ( M ˝ Φ)( ς ¨ ω) = ς ¨ (M ˝ Φ)( ω) = ς ¨ σω = ( ς f )´1 ˝ σω ˝ ςm,where the last equality follows for fixed ω from: m1 

> ij

= mςm(i),ς f (σω (i)) = δς f (j),σω (ςm(i)) =

δj,(ς f )´1(σω (ςm(i))) = mi,(( ς f )´1˝σω ˝ςm)( j). We start with the couples pool. We show that 40 the matched-pair sequence t(ωmi , ω f 

> σω(i)

)uiPN2 is G-exchangeable. For i P N2 the matched-pair sequence for the couple’s pool is (ω)i ” (ωmi , ω f 

> σω(i)

) which we compare to the one under ω1:

ω1 

> i

= ( ωm1 

> i

, ω f 1 

> σω1(i)

) = ( ωm

> ςm(i)

, ω f   

> ςf(σω1(i))

).Using equivariance from Lemma 2, by associativity and identity of composition, 

(ς f ˝ σω1 )( i) = ( ς f ˝ (( ς f )´1 ˝ σω ˝ ςm))( i) = σω (ςm(i)) ,from which we get 

ω1 

> i

= ( ωm

> ςm(i)

, ω f 

> σω(ςm(i))

) = ωςm(i) = ςm ¨ ω a.s.Since ω1 d

= ω, applying the measurable map E yields ω1 d

= ω, we conclude 

ω d

= ςm ¨ ω.For the individual terms, for fixed τm, τ f P G, tωm

> τm(i)

uiPN2 and tω f   

> τf(σω(i))

uiPN2

are G-exchangeable. For men, we have a fixed τm, and action ςm P G. Thus, by Assumption 3, the permutation τm ˝ ςm ˝ τm P G, and we have ωm d

= ( τm ˝ ςm ˝ τm) ¨

ωm. Reindexing both sides, 51 

τm ¨ ωm d

= (( τm ˝ ςm ˝ τm) ˝ τm) ¨ ωm = ( τm ˝ ςm) ¨ ωm = ςm ¨ (τm ¨ ωm).For women we also fix τ f , and note that G-exchangeability of the matched-pair se-quence ωi implies the same for each coordinate. Taking the second coordinate pro-jection we have σω ¨ ω f d

= ( σω ˝ ςm) ¨ ω f . Applying τ f to ω f on both sides, we get 

(τ f ˝ σω ) ¨ ω f d

= ( τ f ˝ (σω ˝ ςm)) ¨ ω f = ςm ¨ (( τ f ˝ σω ) ¨ ω f ).Finally, to complete the proof and show exchangability of configurations, we not that we have label-invariance of (τm, τ f ) P T . Putting it together, for any ς =(ςm, ς f ) P G, set ω1 = ς ¨ ω and (τm1

, τ f 1

) = ( ςm)´1 ˝ τm ˝ ςm, (ς f )´1 ˝ τ f ˝ ς f . Using 

σω1 = ( ς f )´1 ˝ σω ˝ ςm, we get for all i P N2

χ(ω1, τm1

, τ f 1

)i = χ(ω, τm, τ f )ςm(i) a.s. Since ω1 d

= ω, (τm1

, τ f 1

) d

= ( τm, τ f ), and (τm, τ f ) K ω, it follows that tχiuiPN2

> d

=

tχς(i)uiPN2 , i.e. we have G-exchangeability. We denote the corresponding permutation-invariant sigma-algebra as I‹.

## Proof of Theorem 1

We work on the probability space (Ω ˆ T , I b B(T ), μ b ρ). Since Ω is Polish by Assumption 2 and T is Polish so is Ω ˆ T and B(Ω ˆ T ) = I b B(T ). Hence, by Kallenberg (1997, Theorem 5.3), there exists a regular conditional distribution of the      

> 51 For composition of actions g,hPG, we have

(g ¨ (h ¨ ωm)) i = ( h ¨ ωm)g(i) = ωmh(g(i)) = (( h ˝ g) ¨ ωm)i.

41 primitive pair (ω, τ) given I‹ defined in Lemma 4. Denote it by ¯Q : (Ω ˆ T ) ˆ (I b B(T )) Ñ [0, 1 ].Thus, by Kallenberg (1997, Theorem 5.3) for each D P I b B(T ), the map (ω, τ) Þ Ñ

¯Q(( ω, τ), D) is I‹-measurable, and for each (ω, τ), the map D Þ Ñ ¯Q(( ω, τ), D) is a probability measure. By the same reference, for all B P I‹ and all D P I b B(T ),

ż

> B

¯Q(( ω, τ), D) ( μ b ρ)( dω, dτ) = ( μ b ρ)( B X D).The conditional distribution of a given configuration is obtained by pushing this conditional distribution through χi. Since we can select ω0 arbitrarily, the space containing χi is isomorphic to X4. Thus, for all B P B(X4), define ¯ν(( ω, τ), B) ” (μ b ρ)( χi P B | I‹)( ω, τ) = 

ż

1tχi(ω1, τ1) P Bu ¯Q(( ω, τ), dω1, dτ1).This is the directing conditional distribution defined in the statement of the theorem. By Lemma 4, the sequence (χi)iPN2 is exchangeable under within-pool relabellings. Since the configuration space isomorphic to X4 is Polish, the Hewitt-Savage extension of de Finetti’s theorem applies. Therefore, conditional on I‹, the sequence is i.i.d. with directing measure ¯ ν. That is, for all measurable B1, . . . , Bn Ď X4,

(μ b ρ)( χ1 P B1, . . . , χn P Bn | I‹)( ω, τ) = 

> n

ź

> k=1

¯ν(( ω, τ), Bk).This proves the conditional i.i.d. part of the theorem. The conditional demand distribution is the image of this directing measure under the demand map. Since Ψκ = argmax ˝ Φ ˝ proj κ for κ P t c, m, f u, each coordinate of Ψ

first extracts the respective household’s preferences, then forms the household utility representation, and finally maps it into utility-maximising demand. Hence, for every event A in the joint space of demand triples, ¯π(( ω, τ), A) = 

ż

1tΨ(χ) P Au ¯ν(( ω, τ), dχ).This is the conditional random utility and matching representation. Next we show that Hypothesis H0 implies existence of a mixture of configurations that rationalises demand distributions. Let ¯ μc denote the conditional distribution of the factual matched-couple primitives (ωmi , ω f

> σ(i)

) for i P N2, with marginals ¯ μm 

> 2

and ¯μ f 

> 2

. By Hypothesis H0 we have ¯ μm 

> 2

= ¯μm 

> 1

and ¯ μ f 

> 2

= ¯μ f 

> 1

. Thus the marginal distri-bution of partnered men and women are also the marginal distributions of single men and women. Thus, we can construct a probability measure ν‹ on X4 as follows. Draw (ωm, ω f ) „ ¯μc and set (ωm1, ω f 1) = ( ωm, ω f ) so that ν‹ is the distribution of 

(ωm, ω f , ωm, ω f ), which, by construction, is supported on W0. Its couple projection has the factual matched-couple distribution ¯μc, and its counterfactual single pro-jections have the correct single-side marginal distributions by the equalities above. 42 Therefore, pushing ν‹ forward through Ψc, Ψm, Ψ f yields ¯ πc, ¯ πm, ¯ π f , respectively. Hence the marginal conditional demand distributions admit a preference-stable representation ν‹ as a consequence of H0.52 

## Corollary 2

Corollary 2. Let ¯πc, ¯ πm, ¯ π f be the marginal conditional demand distributions of the main theorem, let Ψ = ( Ψc, Ψm, Ψ f ) be the demand map, and let W 0 denote the preference-stable subset of the configuration space. Set S ” Ψ(W0), Γ( ¯π) ”

!

γ : γ ˝ (proj κ )´1 = ¯πκ, κ P t c, m, f u

)

.

Then the following are equivalent: (i) Preference-stable representation. There exists a probability measure ν‹ on X4 with 

ν‹(W0) = 1 and ν‹ ˝ (Ψκ )´1 = ¯πκ for κ P t c, m, f u.(ii) Multi-marginal feasibility. There exists γ P Γ( ¯π) with γ(S) = 1 such that 

inf  

> γPΓ(¯π)

ż

1Sc (x) dγ(x) = 0. 

where S c is the complement of S, i.e. the set of demands incompatible with pref.-stability. (iii) Block-Marschak inequalities. For every bounded measurable triple (φc, φm, φ f ) with 

φc(xc) + φm(xm) + φ f (x f ) ď 0 for all (xc, xm, x f ) P S,

we have ż

φc d ¯πc +

ż

φm d ¯πm +

ż

φ f d ¯π f ď 0. 

Proof. We prove (i) ñ(ii), (ii) ñ(i), and (ii) ô(iii). 

(i) ñ(ii). Suppose ν‹ satisfies (i). Define 

γ‹ ” ν‹ ˝ Ψ´1.Since Ψ = ( Ψc, Ψm, Ψ f ), the κ-marginal of γ‹ is ν‹ ˝ (Ψκ )´1 = ¯πκ, so γ‹ P Γ( ¯π).Moreover, γ‹(S) = ν‹(Ψ´1(S)) ě ν‹(W0) = 1. Hence inf  

> γPΓ(¯π)

ż

1Sc (x) dγ(x) = 0. 

(ii) ñ(i). Suppose the multi-marginal problem has a feasible solution γ P Γ( ¯π) with 

γ(S) = 1. Since X4 is Polish, by Kechris (1995, Theorem 12.13) there exists a measur-able selection s : S Ñ W0 such that Ψ(s(x)) = x for x P S. Define ν ” γ ˝ s´1, then 

ν(W0) = γ(s´1(W0)) ě γ(S) = 1. Since Ψκ ˝ s = proj κ,

ν ˝ (Ψκ )´1 = γ ˝ s´1 ˝ (Ψκ )´1 = γ ˝ (proj κ )´1 = ¯πκ,for κ P t c, m, f u we have that ν is a preference-stable representation, establishing (i). 

> 52 Note that this is not required to coincide with the sampled directing law ¯ ν.

43 (ii) ô(iii). By Kantorovich duality for the multi-marginal transport problem with cost 

1Sc (Villani, 2009, Theorem 5.10), feasibility is equivalent to the dual inequalities of (iii). These are the Block and Marschak (1959) inequalities for the preference-stable random utility representation. In the finite-support implementation, they reduce to the corresponding finite Block-Marschak polynomial restrictions. 

## Proof of Proposition 1

(i) ñ (ii): Suppose the marginals ¯ πκ admit a rationalisation by some ν∆ supported on 

Θ0. Stack the marginals into the vector ¯ π = ( ¯πc, ¯ πm, ¯ π f ) and define ν∆ per component 

ν∆ 

> l

= ν∆(θl ) for θl P Θ0. By construction of A, the column A¨,l is the indicator vector of the revealed preference types projected from θl via proj κ for κ P t c, m, f u. Hence 

(Aν∆)κ,j = ř 

> l

1tproj κ (θl ) = ξκ 

> j

u ν∆(θl ) = ¯πκ 

> j

by the first equality of (R.2), so Aν∆ = ¯π.

(ii) ñ (i): Conversely, given ν∆ with Aν∆ = ¯π, define ν∆ on Θ0 by ν∆(θl ) = ν∆ 

> l

.The same computation shows that the marginals of ν∆ under proj κ coincide with ¯ πκ,so ν∆ rationalises the observed marginals. The equivalence between (ii) and (iii) is shown in McFadden and Richter (1991); McFadden (2005). Statement (iii) referenced therein, differs from (iii) in that it addi-tionally requires ιJν∆ = 1. We now show that this is implied. It is easy to see that by construction of A for any solution of the quadratic problem we have γ = π and since 3 = ιJπ = ιJ Aν∆ = 3ιJν∆ by construction, we get ιJν∆ = 1. Thus constraint ν∆ ě 0in is sufficient for γ to be on the probability simplex. It will be useful to write this problem with a tightened cone constraint indexed by ν. Let L be a lower diagonal matrix from the Cholesky decomposition Ω = LL J.Then we can rewrite the quadratic form (iii) as min 

> γP

tAν∆|ν∆ěνu(π ´ γ)J LL J(π ´ γ).Using γ = Aν∆ and introducing a slack variable s ě 0 such that we can write ν∆ =

ν + s we obtain min 

> ν∆=ν+s,sě0

(π ´ A(ν + s)) J LL J(π ´ A(ν + s)) .This does not depend on ν∆ but only on s and we can write it in the quadratic form min 

> sě0

"12 sJ AJΩAs ´ sJ AJΩ(π ´ Aν)

*

.Letting H = AJΩA and f (π, ν) = ´AJΩ(π ´ Aν) we get a canonical form of a non-negative least squares problem, with gradient for iteration τ ě 0 defined as 

μτ = Hs τ + f (π, ν). Johansson et al. (2006) show that component-wise projection 

sτ+1, j = max (0, sτ,j ´ μτ,jdj) where d = diag (Hι)´1 and j = 1, . . . , |Θ0| referring to the 

jth component of s will find the solution of the problem. 44 Remark 1. Proposition 1 characterises rationalisability at the discrete level. Its relationship to the structural hypothesis H 0 is characterised as follows: W0 Ď θ´1(ΘSlutsky  

> 0

) Ď θ´1(Θ0)

where W 0 is the set of configurations with ωmi = ωmi1 and ω fj = ω fj1 (true preference stabil-ity), ΘSlutsky  

> 0

collects discrete configuration types whose continuous representatives satisfy the Slutsky restriction of Lemma 3, and Θ0 collects those satisfying the discrete CARP/GARP characterisation of Definition 6. Both inclusions reflect that each subsequent characterisation is necessary but not sufficient for the previous one. Consequently, existence of ν‹ on W 0 implies existence of a rationalising ν∆ on Θ0, but not the converse. The test based on Θ0 therefore has correct size under H 0: rejection rules out rationalisability on the most permissive set, and hence rules out H 0. Power is conservative and the test may fail to detect violations of H 0 that lie in the gap between W 0 and θ´1(Θ0).

# A.2 Auxiliary Proofs 

## Permutation equivariance of assignment problem 

Let Φij ” Φ(zi, zj) and the set of permutation matrices M ” t μ P t 0, 1 uNˆN : ř 

> j

μij =

1, ř 

> i

μij = 1u. Define the assignment problem as 

M(Φ) P arg max 

> μPM

ÿ

> i,j

μij Φij .Now fix (ςm, ς f ) P G ˆ G and define the relabelled surplus as Φ1 

> ij

” Φςm(i), ς f (j), and the assignment matrix μ1 

> ij

” μςm(i), ς f (j). M is permutation-equivariant if μ P M(Φ)

implies μ1 P M(Φ1). First, for feasibility, if μ P M, then for every i,

ÿ

> j

μ1 

> ij

= ÿ

> j

μςm(i), ς f (j) = ÿ

> j1

μςm(i), j1 = 1, since ς f P G Ă S8 is a bijection. The same holds for ςm P G, and hence μ1 P M.Second, for the objective, we note that (ςm, ς f ) is a bijection on N2, with inverse 

(( ςm)´1, (ς f )´1). Hence, by reindexing the sum, we show that the relabelled assign-ment problem has the same objective value as the original one: 

ÿ

> i,j

μ1

> ij

Φ1 

> ij

= ÿ

> i,j

μςm(i), ς f (j) Φςm(i), ς f (j) = ÿ

> i1,j1

μi1 j1 Φi1 j1 . (8) Finally we must show that any other ν1 P M is inferior to μ1 in the relabelled problem. Using (8) for the first and last equality, we have 

ÿ

> i,j

μ1

> ij

Φ1 

> ij

= ÿ

> i1,j1

μi1 j1 Φi1 j1 ě ÿ

> i1,j1

νi1 j1 Φi1 j1 = ÿ

> i,j

ν1

> ij

Φ1

> ij

where the middle inequality follows from μ P M(Φ). We move from ν1 back to ν

using the same inverse as defined on μ.45 Examples 

Example 2. For our example in Figure 1 let Zeus & Hera be the couple (2, 2 ), Athena the single (0, 1 ), and Apollo the single (1, 0 ). The transposition τ f = ( 1 2 ) generates the hypothetical couple Zeus & Athena (2, 1 ) and the counterfactual single woman Hera (0, 2 ).Similarly, the transposition τm = ( 1 2 ) creates the counterfactual couple Apollo & Hera (1, 2 )

and the counterfactual single Zeus (2, 0 ). Applying them both through τ1 = ( 1 2 ) ˝ σ ˝ (1 2 )

leads to the counterfactual couple Apollo & Athena (1, 1 ) and the counterfactual singles Zeus 

(2, 0 ) and Hera (0, 2 ). Indeed, we have for Zeus: τ f (σ(τm(2))) = τ f (σ(2)) = τ f (2) = 1

and for Apollo: τ f (σ(τm(1))) = τ f (σ(1)) = τ f (0) = 0. The matching graph is unchanged but the original couples edge is now relabelled as Apollo & Athena, the single man edge as Zeus, and the single woman edge as Hera. The triple (i, τm, τ f ) = ( 2, (1 2 ), (1 2 )) represents the corresponding configuration. 

Example 3. To see how (R.2) relates to the existence of resource shares ρ, we look at a spe-cific numerical example of a stylised reduced-form dictatorship collective model, in which the household type is determined by the preferences of person with the higher bargaining power. Refer to Figure 2. An individual can be of type ξ P t ξst , ξs1t, ξst 1 u representing tuples of the line-segments of the respective delegate consumption bundles (xs, xt), (x1

> s

, xt), (xs, x1

> t

). De-note the three distributions πm, π f , πc supported on this choice space. Now, assume we knew how the latent configurations were allocated. As stated above, for this we do not need the whole assignment matrix but only the implied matches (couplings) of latent male and female revealed preference types. Let the matching matrix induced by the mixture distribution of primitive types ωm and ω f , be denoted by μm f = P(m = ξm, f = ξ f ) and take 

μ =



μst ,st μst ,s1t μst ,st 1

μs1t,st μs1t,s1t μs1t,st 1

μst 1,st μst 1,s1t μst 1,st 1

 =



0 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.1 00 0.1 0

 ,

which implies the row margins πm = ( πmst , πms1t, πmst 1 ) = ( 0.6, 0.3, 0.1 ) and column margins 

π f = ( π fst , π fs1t, π fst 1 ) = ( 0.2, 0.4, 0.4 ). Now, assume that we observe couple’s choices πc =(πcst , πcs1t, πcst 1 ) = ( 0.2, 0.7, 0.1 ). Using, the masses of our couplings matrix μ we can ask the question whether there exists ρ’s which induces choices consistent with this observed distribution. Take, for example (ξst , ξs1t). Using the extreme cases where every household consisting of individuals of the respective types had bargaining power approaching 0 or 1,this type of couple could induce ξst with probability masses πst P (0, 0.2 ) and ξs1t with 

πs1t P (0, 0.2 ). Proceeding in the same fashion for all other types, we can construct bounds 

πcst P (0.0, 0.8 ), πcs1t P (0.1, 0.6 ), and πcst 1 = ( 0, 0.5 ).53 Clearly, the observed πc is outside these bounds. Thus, there is no ρ which rationalises the observed type distribution, which provides evidence against stable preferences. In our test, we do not assume knowledge of the 

> 53 There are also joint restrictions which can be obtained by solving a linear program.

46 coupling matrix μ, and rationalisability becomes an existence statement over over all possible couplings consistent with the observed marginals. 

# A.3 Simulations 

In this section, we investigate the properties of our proposed test in a simulation set-ting. In particular, we are interested in how much power it has to detect a violation of the stable preference assumption and whether or not it has a correct proportion of false positives. Since specifying a parametric continuous demand system requires at least five goods to impose the SNR(S-1) condition on the Slutsky matrix and dis-tinguish the collective model from the unitary model, we will not sample continuous demands as functions of prices and individual budget constraints, but rather draw our sample directly from the discrete choice space. 54 This should be interpreted as a continuous uniform distribution of choices on different budget planes, where the relative prices are such that the partitions of the budget planes are of equal size. Recall that we test this against the set of households which are consistent with the necessary conditions of the collective axioms based on aggregate consumption but not consistent when single data and the stable preference assumption is added. This set is denoted by Θ1 and we have Θcollective = Θ0 Y Θ1. If we reject the null hypothesis that both the collective axiom and the stable preference assumption holds, by exclud-ing all irrational matches ΘzΘcollective , we must conclude that the stable preference assumption does not hold. To control the proportion of households for whom this is the case (our data generating process) we introduce the parameter p which spec-ifies the probability that a particular choice is both collectively rational and satisfies the stable preference assumption p ” P(θ P Θ0).55 By only considering collectively rational choices in our simulations we thus have 1 ´ p = P(θ R Θ0) = P(θ P Θ1)

by construction. Simulation lets us trivially treat P = μ b ρ as a joint measure over the type space, rather than a directing measure from a de Finetti representation of configurations. Our simulation setting is as follows. We consider S = 100 samples of size n Pt500, 1000, 2000 u where n = n f = nm = nc such that n = 3n in a minimal setting with T = 3 periods which we construct by drawing tnp u indices from the space of collectively rational matches X0 for which the stable preference assumption holds and rn(1 ´ p)s indices from the space of collectively rational types X1 which does not satisfy the assumption. Based on a sample of matches, we then calculate the choice   

> 54 A revealed preference based setting allows us to test the restrictions of the model with only three goods (Cherchye et al., 2007), whereas Browning and Chiappori (1998) need five goods.
> 55 This rationality parameter is similar as for example λin Dette et al. (2016) which specifies the population’s deviation from Slutsky symmetry.

47 Figure 3: Power function for n = 1, 500 (l.h.s) and n = 3, 000 (r.h.s.) 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25      

> α=0.1
> α=0.05
> α=0.01 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 100.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25
> α=0.1
> α=0.05
> α=0.01

probabilities pπ accordingly. For estimation, we only use the marginal distribution of choices of each sample of household compositions and draw B = 100 samples from the respective empirical distributions (i.e. with replacement) to calculate πb

> τn

and estimate the empirical distribution of the test statistic J τn

> n,b

. These simulations are repeated for p P t 0.75, 0.85, 0.9, 0.95, 0.975, 0.99, 1.00 u.Figure 3 shows the power of our test against the non-stable preference alternative as a function of p, with sample-size n = 500 for the left-hand side graph, and n =

1000 for the right-hand side graph, respectively. We use monotone cubic splines to interpolate between the actual simulation results, which are marked as solid dots. To be more precise, the respective functions refer to sample rejection frequencies using the rejection rule J Þ Ñ 1

"

J ą y

F´1 

> Jn

(1 ´ α)

*

for α P t 0.01, 0.05, 0.10 u. In addition to this, we also observe that as n increases the power of our test improves and is able to correctly reject the hypothesis of a collectively rational population already at small proportions p.The intercepts of these functions should be interpreted as the proportion of false positives (type I errors) since they correspond to the case where everyone is rational. One might expect that for a correctly sized test the empirical rejection frequencies should tend to α. However, given our partial identification procedure we have a composite null hypothesis, i.e. the probability of a type I error should be at most α as defined in equation (6). To see this note that every vector of ”true” choice frequencies denoted by π0 lying in the interior of the cone will have projection residuals of length zero. Bootstrapping out of pπ which tends to π0 using the usual regularity properties could then lead to a confidence interval which is always entirely in the interior of the 48 Figure 4: Type I error for n0 = 5 (l.h.s) and n0 = 2 (r.h.s.) worst-case matches 00.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.1 0.05 0.01 500 1000 2000 00.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.1 0.05 0.01 500 1000 2000 

cone and we would never wrongly reject the null hypothesis. This also implies that in such a case our bootstrap distribution is degenerate and has mass one at point zero. In our Monte Carlo setting and the case where p = 1.0, we randomly select types from the type-space X0, satisfying collective rationality. Thus the ”true” parameter vector ν0 is assumed to have a uniform distribution over the probability simplex and the worst-case, namely to get a ν such that π0 = Aν is on the boundary of the cone with respect to any of its dimensions, occurs with measure zero. Thus, in order to evaluate whether the size of our test is correct under the test’s minimax strategy, we have to construct a worst case. For this, note that the test is constructed in a way that considers hypothetical types by taking combinations of possible household choice behaviour per price regime over a range of price regimes. To fix notation, we will call two collectively rational matches similar if there is at least one element in the product space spanned by these two matches which is an element of the space of collectively rational matches that do not satisfy the stable preference hypothesis. We will then construct worst cases by specifying a distribution over n0

such similar matches. To make sure that our π0 is on the boundary of the cone in all dimensions, i.e. on the cusp, we shift the cone by manually controlling the tightening parameter τn according to this distribution. Figure 4 shows simulation results for two such worst case scenarios with 5 similar matches and 2 similar matches, respectively. The size results do not seem to deteriorate much with the number of worst case matches included in the sample. Since the properties of the test are based on an asymptotic argument, we should see the empirical frequency of false positives tend-ing to the respective α which define the rejection rules and are plotted on the x-axis. The results are what one would expect, with all sample sizes being reasonably accu-49 rate. Since in a well-behaved test, false-positives are by definition rather rare events, in order to minimize simulation uncertainty, we increased the number of Monte Carlo repetitions to S = 500. which greatly increased computational complexity due to the high dimensionality of the testing problem. 

# A.4 Further Results 

Table 3: Results Conditional on Private Expenditure Class, Private Goods, Exogenous Prices 

Longitudinal Internet studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) Years Private Expenditure Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2009 2010 2012 high 90 90 127 115 0.000 2009 2010 2012 mid 100 99 84 69 0.028 2009 2010 2012 low 110 107 89 55 0.386 

Note: Number of total couples, rational couples according to aggregate CARP, total singles and ra-tional singles according to GARP, for different combinations of periods and private expenditure class (low, mid, high). 

50 Table 4: Results for Public Goods with Exogenous Prices 

## Longitudinal Internet studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) Years Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2009 2010 2012 1259 1217 390 320 0.074 Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS) Years Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2012 2013 2014 312 300 291 276 0.008 2011 2013 2014 303 298 270 253 0.012 2011 2012 2014 300 297 270 253 0.026 2011 2012 2013 317 307 298 275 0.024 2010 2013 2014 246 238 207 192 0.000 2010 2012 2014 246 239 212 194 0.022 2010 2012 2013 258 252 234 212 0.052 2010 2011 2013 259 248 231 207 0.060 2010 2011 2012 288 281 259 237 0.054 2005 2011 2012 254 239 210 182 0.012 Spanish Continuous Family Expenditure Survey (ECPF) Years Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 1994.3 1994.1 1994.2 106 105 5 3 0.206 1993.4 1994.1 1994.2 108 105 8 4 0.052 1992.2 1992.3 1992.1 93 90 15 14 0.030 1990.4 1991.1 1991.2 95 94 14 12 0.012 1989.3 1989.1 1989.2 107 104 4 3 0.026 1988.2 1988.3 1988.4 96 94 6 3 0.398 1987.1 1987.2 1987.3 124 121 8 6 0.140 1986.4 1987.1 1987.2 154 152 9 5 0.406 1986.3 1986.4 1987.1 129 127 7 6 0.022 1986.3 1986.4 1986.2 125 120 9 9 0.058     

> Note: Number of total couples, rational couples according to aggregate CARP, total singles and ra-tional singles according to GARP, for different combinations of periods. Sampling for the ECPF is quarterly, for which we use the year.quarter notation.

51 Table 5: Results Conditional on Demographics for Public Goods, Exogenous Prices 

Longitudinal Internet studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) Years College Age Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2009 2010 2012 1 2 167 157 72 64 0.070 2009 2010 2012 1 1 373 363 83 69 0.174 2009 2010 2012 1 0 183 180 50 32 0.900 2009 2010 2012 0 2 239 232 105 92 0.050 2009 2010 2012 0 1 237 230 62 50 0.086 2009 2010 2012 0 0 60 55 18 13 0.456 Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS) Years Age Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2012 2013 2014 2 70 68 131 122 0.024 2012 2013 2014 1 188 180 123 114 0.014 2012 2013 2014 0 49 44 33 31 0.220 2011 2013 2014 2 66 65 116 108 0.002 2011 2013 2014 1 184 180 117 109 0.050 2011 2013 2014 0 50 50 34 29 0.006 2011 2012 2014 2 65 65 117 108 0.056 2011 2012 2014 1 184 178 117 110 0.030 2011 2012 2014 0 49 49 34 30 0.048 2011 2012 2013 2 73 71 128 117 0.070 2011 2012 2013 1 183 174 124 114 0.036 2011 2012 2013 0 55 52 41 37 0.004 2010 2013 2014 2 50 48 84 76 0.072 2010 2013 2014 1 145 140 87 81 0.192 2010 2013 2014 0 48 48 33 30 0.064 2010 2012 2014 2 49 46 86 76 0.060 2010 2012 2014 1 146 143 94 89 0.246 2010 2012 2014 0 49 49 30 26 0.034 2010 2012 2013 2 55 53 98 87 0.030 2010 2012 2013 1 143 135 93 84 0.050 2010 2012 2013 0 52 49 36 33 0.012 2010 2011 2013 2 56 54 96 86 0.020 2010 2011 2013 1 145 138 95 86 0.022 2010 2011 2013 0 52 52 35 29 0.000 2010 2011 2012 2 72 70 115 105 0.060 2010 2011 2012 1 156 151 100 94 0.030 2010 2011 2012 0 55 55 39 35 0.100 2005 2011 2012 2 48 45 99 85 0.018 2005 2011 2012 1 114 110 72 65 0.124 2005 2011 2012 0 88 78 37 31 0.306  

> Note: Number of total couples, rational couples according to aggregate CARP, total singles and ratio-nal singles according to GARP, for different combinations of periods and demographics.

52 Table 6: Results with Endogenous Expenditure 

Longitudinal Internet studies for the Social Sciences (LISS): P rivate 

Years # Min 25 th Quantile Median Mean 75 th Quantile Max 2009 2010 2012 9 0.000 0.005 0.016 0.122 0.183 0.532 Longitudinal Internet studies for the Social Sciences (LISS): P ublic 

Years # Min 25 th Quantile Median Mean 75 th Quantile Max 2009 2010 2012 7 0.002 0.010 0.556 0.436 0.649 0.922 

Note: Summary statistics of p-values for different combinations of periods with control function v

evaluated at v0. The control function is estimated with income level acting as an instrument for total consumption. 

Table 7: Results for Mixed Integer Procedure 

LISS ( private )Years Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2009 2010 2012 605 605 463 380 0.010 LISS ( public )Years Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2009 2010 2012 1259 1259 390 320 0.000 LISS ( private , conditional on demographics )Years College Age Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2009 2010 2012 1 2 92 92 79 71 0.084 2009 2010 2012 1 1 163 163 93 75 0.064 2009 2010 2012 1 0 65 65 64 56 0.000 2009 2010 2012 0 2 137 137 121 97 0.000 2009 2010 2012 0 1 114 114 85 65 0.000 2009 2010 2012 0 0 34 34 21 16 0.000 LISS ( public , conditional on demographics )Years College Age Ntotal couples Nrational couples Ntotal singles Nrational singles p-value 2009 2010 2012 1 2 167 167 72 64 0.066 2009 2010 2012 1 1 373 373 83 69 0.014 2009 2010 2012 1 0 183 183 50 32 0.034 2009 2010 2012 0 2 239 239 105 92 0.044 2009 2010 2012 0 1 237 237 62 50 0.054 2009 2010 2012 0 0 60 60 18 13 0.154 

Note: Mixed Integer Cherchye et al. (2011) 

53 A.5 Descriptive Statistics 

Table 8: Descriptive Statistics (Private Goods) Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) Food out Clothing Leisure Year N Mean IQR P Mean IQR P Mean IQR P2009 5594 43.463 45.0 108.1 69.825 60.0 107.4 20.121 20.0 98.6 2010 5337 38.798 50.0 109.7 71.835 75.0 105.3 23.362 20.0 98.0 2012 5463 40.611 50.0 113.4 74.347 80.0 106.6 23.743 25.0 100.4 Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS) Dairy Bread Meat Year N Mean IQR P Mean IQR P Mean IQR P2000 1506 81.7 120.4 121.1 113.2 102.8 116.5 322.0 439.7 128.3 2005 1601 222.3 277.8 110.5 199.3 171.8 103.0 1003.5 1175.8 118.6 2010 2839 475.7 492.7 116.7 303.3 270.8 107.6 1862.1 1926.0 105.3 2011 2983 520.3 544.8 106.3 317.3 270.9 108.9 2165.8 2154.7 109.2 2012 3154 551.0 550.5 104.4 330.2 291.7 112.0 2284.8 2315.0 108.3 2013 3076 617.7 622.9 113.1 352.9 287.1 108.0 2366.2 2399.8 97.0 2014 2516 695.3 675.8 114.4 372.9 323.0 107.5 2805.6 2847.5 102.1 Spanish Continuous Family Expenditure Survey (ECPF) Clothing Food out Nondurables Year N Mean IQR P Mean IQR P Mean IQR P1985 65 1284.4 1406.4 165.7 940.9 899.7 174.3 35.1 43.8 150.6 1986 95 1334.8 1545.3 191.6 927.3 1128.1 224.7 28.8 47.6 164.5 1987 288 1743.3 1897.1 174.2 1054.7 1244.8 191.5 37.0 53.8 157.2 1988 195 1537.6 1831.0 158.1 1036.2 1400.9 160.0 42.6 53.3 145.8 1989 225 2253.9 2344.4 134.3 1446.3 1685.6 139.6 57.2 70.5 140.7 1990 205 2289.9 2565.5 106.6 1636.4 2152.1 112.2 41.0 53.2 101.9 1991 210 2255.2 2398.5 183.5 1852.4 2229.4 208.7 52.5 66.7 160.8 1992 202 2652.5 2795.1 154.5 1852.6 1957.9 154.5 69.1 85.4 144.0 1993 185 2823.0 2471.3 112.4 2386.2 3022.2 121.0 75.7 80.8 114.5 1994 210 2102.8 2471.0 106.4 2322.7 2730.5 111.2 79.8 97.4 102.9 1995 194 2186.9 2287.9 113.6 2068.9 2187.8 122.2 117.8 118.3 114.4 1996 199 2397.4 2595.2 126.5 2761.4 3230.4 126.6 107.5 129.6 129.5 

Note: Descriptive statistics of the LISS, RMLS and ECPF reporting mean, interquantile range (IQR) and price index P. LISS quantities consumed per month are inflated to 2005 prices and denoted in Euro (source: Eurostat http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/prices/hicp/html/ hicp_coicop_inx_index.en.html ). RMLS quantities are per week and inflated to 2014 prices and denoted in local currency (Russian Ruble). Goods are aggregated to composite good categories as follows. Dairy: Canned/powdered milk, fresh milk, sour milk products and sour cream; Bread: White (wheat) bread and black (rye) bread; Meat: Canned meat, beef/veal, lamb/goat, pork, giblets, poul-try, lard, sausage and semi-prepared meat products. ECPF consumption is per week with quarterly collection frequency. We only report descriptive statistics of the first quarter of a given year. ECPF quantities are normalized to arbitrary units using the price indices P. 

54 Table 9: Descriptive Statistics (Public Goods) Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) Housing Transport Energy Year N Mean IQR P Mean IQR P Mean IQR P2009 5594 590.6 460.0 108.1 141.1 150.0 107.4 282.0 123.0 98.6 2010 5337 600.1 449.5 109.7 135.2 150.0 105.3 210.4 125.5 98.0 2012 5463 577.4 475.0 113.4 148.2 150.0 106.6 219.1 116.0 100.4 Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RMLS) Housing Transport Energy Year N Mean IQR P Mean IQR P Mean IQR P2000 1506 4388.4 6051.9 116.3 2942.3 670.7 29.0 3454.2 0.0 5.7 2005 1601 7961.1 9264.3 118.0 2996.0 2282.5 117.9 3808.0 1280.2 18.0 2010 2839 12336.3 11699.2 102.7 3697.7 2437.6 240.0 3976.4 2226.7 43.8 2011 2983 12324.6 11744.0 112.1 3697.0 2500.1 234.0 4496.1 2500.1 48.3 2012 3154 12349.8 11444.4 112.1 3799.7 2699.0 250.5 4413.2 3922.6 55.3 2013 3076 13018.6 11098.5 103.6 4109.9 2591.4 270.9 4958.9 4311.5 63.6 2014 2516 13576.1 11050.0 105.1 4169.0 2550.0 275.3 5238.0 5100.0 63.8 Spanish Continuous Family Expenditure Survey (ECPF) Clothing Transport Petrol Year N Mean IQR P Mean IQR P Mean IQR P1985 65 1284.4 1406.4 165.7 553.0 942.6 188.9 183.4 41.8 92.7 1986 95 1334.8 1545.3 191.6 647.9 1002.6 277.0 120.8 0.0 112.4 1987 288 1743.3 1897.1 174.2 612.5 1000.7 213.2 190.3 48.6 98.2 1988 195 1537.6 1831.0 158.1 658.1 1050.2 154.2 244.0 172.8 86.4 1989 225 2253.9 2344.4 134.3 681.2 1120.6 119.6 397.2 314.0 95.1 1990 205 2289.9 2565.5 106.6 617.2 1017.1 115.1 451.4 254.2 114.6 1991 210 2255.2 2398.5 183.5 999.5 1252.6 244.6 493.3 398.2 105.0 1992 202 2652.5 2795.1 154.5 838.8 1307.8 147.2 459.3 437.0 90.6 1993 185 2823.0 2471.3 112.4 1099.0 1631.4 119.9 481.2 318.0 122.4 1994 210 2102.8 2471.0 106.4 1101.0 1559.4 114.4 752.0 959.9 113.4 1995 194 2186.9 2287.9 113.6 1005.7 1470.0 119.4 497.9 561.0 125.1 1996 199 2397.4 2595.2 126.5 1302.5 1954.3 112.1 667.5 938.7 106.3      

> Note: Descriptive statistics of the LISS, RMLS and ECPF reporting mean, interquantile range (IQR) and price index P. LISS quantities consumed per month are inflated to 2005 prices (CPI and HPI) and denoted in Euro (source: Eurostat http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/prices/hicp/html/ hicp_coicop_inx_index.en.html ). RMLS quantities are per week and inflated to 2014 prices and denoted in local currency (Russian Ruble). Goods are aggregated to composite good categories as follows. Transport: Transportation services, running costs for cars (excluding fuel) and Energy: Fuel, Gas, Coal and Firewood. ECPF consumption is per week with quarterly collection frequency. We only report descriptive statistics of the first quarter of a given year. ECPF quantities are normalized to arbitrary units using the price indices P. We chose a combination of private and public goods due to the limited availability of the latter.

55